
Page_Number 0 started
Unit-2.indd 17

NELSON MANDELA: LONG
WALK TO FREEDOM

Let’s BEGIN

1. You have read the story about Nelson Mandela in your
textbook, First Flight, and the struggle of the people of South
Africa. Mandela draws our attention to the meaning and
importance of freedom and leading a life with freedom.

He states that freedom comes with responsibilities.
Discuss with your peers, how freedom and responsibilities
go hand in hand.

READING COMPREHENSION
Text I

Given below is a speech by Sardar Patel, one of the prominent
figures of India’s freedom struggle. This is one of the convocation
speeches delivered by him. Read the speech and answer the
questions that follow.

I must thank you for the affectionate and warm welcome which
you have extended to me and for the love and regard which you

Reprint 2024-25

1076CHO2

27-Jun-2019 04:20:40 PM

Page_Number 0 ended
/n
Page_Number 1 started
have shown me by conferring this honour to me. Gifts are of
many kinds those achieved by one’s own endeavour are good
and deserved, but no gift should be conferred on one whose
worthiness has not been tested. By selecting me without assuring
yourself of my fitness for the gift, you have laid me under a heavy
debt and, by your injunctions that I should continue to prove
worthy of it throughout my life, you have imposed on me a very
difficult obligation. At present, I cannot say anything because I
am bound by your love and affection; and, therefore, with your
blessing and God’s grace, I pray that I may prove worthy of it.
Should I fail, the blame for my failure will be shared by you
as well.
On this occasion, I wish to place before you a few
thoughts which occur to my mind as incidental to our
hard-won freedom. We have now won our freedom. But
just as I am doubtful, if I deserved the honour that
you have done me, you have also to think whether you
have done everything to deserve freedom that you have
attained after such a bitter and sustained struggle.
There are people who think that having won freedom,
there is nothing more to do about it. Freedom has come
to us through sacrifices. Those who made sacrifices
tasted the fruit of their efforts and self-denials, but it is for
those who are now enjoying freedom to taste its fruit. After
the last World War, there is an all-round deterioration in
human standards. People have become self-centered. They
have forgotten or ignored the wider interests of the country.
The essential and noteworthy features of our struggle were:
sacrifice, truth, and non-violence. The weapons of the
World War were: violence, brute force, political and
military moves, and counter moves. As a result of
the churning of the ocean, the world has emitted
poison. That poison is spreading all over and
there is none to swallow it. The countries which
were free have managed to digest it somewhat, but we, who have
just attained our freedom, it is hard to do the same. Therefore,
those who think that having attained freedom they have attained
everything have really attained nothing! The freedom that we
have won is yet to be consolidated. The foundations of freedom
have to be well and truly laid! This one-year old child has to be
nursed and nourished, instructed and strengthened. It is for us
to do it and we must do it.

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
4,
4

\ 18 Worps AND Expressions 2 — CLass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 18 27-Jun-2019 04:20:40 PM

Page_Number 1 ended
/n
Page_Number 2 started
Unit-2.indd 19

In India today, there is no time for useless controversies and
unnecessary debates and disputes. One can indulge in these
pastimes when one has time and leisure. At present, we have
to occupy ourselves with the all absorbing task of making the
foundation of our freedom strong and unassailable. We have to
reflect on our place in this broken and destructed world and what
our duty and obligations are! If we fail to make the best use of
our freedom to make it worthwhile and turn it to our advantage
and advancements, future generations will heap curses on us.
They will say that a spiritualist, a great soul gave us this precious
boon, but we did not know how to retain it and lost it.

I should like to urge upon those who train citizens of tomorrow
and to those citizens of tomorrow that we have yet to stand on
our feet. We must concentrate on one thing alone, viz., how to
make our country strong and united. We can make it strong
when hearts are pure and when we fully appreciate our duty.
Now that foreign rulers have gone, are we in a position to sustain
the whole burden that has devolved on us? When we took over
from them, the administrative fabric was in tatters. We have
to mend and place it. This, in itself, is a heavy responsibility.
It is for our universities to train young men to shoulder these
responsibilities.

The great university of life is full of experiences, but to make
full use of those experiences, all of us students, teachers and
professors—have to be cautious and on guard.

The most essential requisite is character. If your character is
lacking and you leave the precincts of the alma mater without
your character fully developed, you will be wasting an opportunity
of a lifetime.

You have to realise that India has to attain its rightful place
in the comity of nations. The leadership of Asia would be hers
if she conducts herself well and if her citizens make their fitting
contribution to nation’s resurgence. Whatever trials and troubles
we might have passed through, there is no denying the fact
that we have a precious inheritance and the teachings we have
received from the departed leaders are great assets for us.

India abounds in the resources of nature and manpower. They
are awaiting full use. That task must devolve on young men and
women. We ourselves were trained in the school of experience.
We fought for freedom and we have attained that prize for you. It
is now up to you to prove yourself worthy of the same. This you
can do only if you work with single-minded devotion to the cause
of the country. It is only then that you can deserve this freedom
and be proud of it.

Unir 2 — Netson Manpeta: Lon Walk TO FREEDOM

Reprint 2024-25

Loox Up
AND
\ Unpersr,

ND

conferring
endeavour
obligation

precincts

unassailable

27-Jun-2019 04:20:41 PM

Page_Number 2 ended
/n
Page_Number 3 started
The real danger of India lies in our disunity. That poison of
communalism was spread in the past. You should draw a curtain
over it. Only then could we equip ourselves for the freedom that
has come to us. There are still people in the country whose loyalty
to India has not settled down. They should and will leave India.

This is the occasion for mutual help and mutual cooperation.

Loox Up

comity of We must know what our duty is as true citizens. Your teacher has
nations to impart that duty. Unless we learn to shoulder our responsibility

. in the true spirit of discipline and citizenship we cannot go ahead.
communalism We must strengthen our shoulders and our legs so that we can
inheritance stand erect and bear the burden that has devolved on us. Then

alone would we secure the real objective of freedom.
resurgence
(Source: The Collected Works of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel

Volume XIII [1 January 1948-31 December 1948],
Editor: P.N. Chopra, Konark Publishers Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi)

XTRAPOLATION

TeX

Complete the sentences given below by choosing the
most appropriate word or phrase.

Q.1. The occasion of the speech of Sardar Patel here is

(a) an address to a public gathering
(b) aconvocation address at a university
(c) a speech in Indian Parliament
(d) a-speech delivered to civil servants
Q.2. Patel feels that future generations will heap curses
on us if

(a) we fail to protect our freedom

(b) we fail to protect the corrupt people in public life
(c) we wage war against other nations

(d) we understand the need for peace

Q.3. The first and foremost thing Patel stressed to be

/ % A done is
| i of \ (a) to make the country strong and united
Pa I. ‘ \ (b) to give employment to everyone
( (c) to fight a war against those who oppressed us

fo (d) to make every citizen feel happy

\ 20 Worps AND Expressions 2 — CLass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 20 27-Jun-2019 04:20:41 PM

Page_Number 3 ended
/n
Page_Number 4 started
Q.4. One major characteristic of university education,
as Sardar Patel believes, is
(a) character
(b) duty
(c) knowledge
(d) power

Q.5. What did Patel not mean when he said, “You have
to realise that India has to attain its rightful place
in the comity of nations”? Tick the right answer.
(a) Friendly and cordial relationship with other nations
(b) Group of nations which wage war against other
(c) Community of people
(d) Nations from a continent

Q.6. ‘India abounds in the resources of nature and

manpower’ means
(a) India has a vibrant economy

(b) India’s natural resources and population are a
great resource

(c) India’s lack of manpower
(d) Indians are great resource for development
Q.7. What is the greatest danger for India as Patel
believes in his speech?
(a) India has a vibrant economy.

(b) India’s natural resources and population are a
great resource.

(c) India’s lack of manpower.
(d) Indians are great resource for development.

Q.8. Complete the following statement based on your
understanding of Patel’s speech.

The first and foremost duty of the young nation is

Unir 2 — Netson Manpeta: Lon Walk TO FREEDOM

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 21 27-Jun-2019 04:20:42 PM

Page_Number 4 ended
/n
Page_Number 5 started
1. Use the following words and phrases in your own sentences.

(a) Precincts

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
E
4

(b) Comity of nations

(c) Unassailable

(d) Mutual cooperation

2. Sardar Patel called upon young students to understand
the meaning of freedom and ways to sustain it. Here are
two key words which he stressed upon—‘reedom’ and
‘Responsibility’. Working in pairs, find words and phrases
which convey the feeling of these words and write below.

Worps AND Expressions 2 — CLass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 22 27-Jun-2019 04:20:42 PM

Page_Number 5 ended
/n
Page_Number 6 started
You may have written above at least seven to eight words for
each key word. Using the words write at least five sentences
describing ‘Freedom’ and ‘Responsibility’. One has been done
for you.

Example: Freedom is not free.

Use of Articles

1. You have come across the use of articles ‘a’, ‘an’, and ‘the’ in
the lesson. The tasks in the textbook give you the idea that
the use of ‘the’ with proper noun carries a special meaning.
Read the following paragraph from the speech you have read
above. The articles are missing in the paragraph. With the
help of your partner, fill in the blanks.

weapons of. world war were: violence, brute
force, political and military moves, and counter moves.

As result of. churning of the ocean,

world has emitted poison. That poison is spreading all over

Unir 2 — Netson Manpeta: Lon Walk TO FREEDOM

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 23. 27-Jun-2019 04:20:42 PM

Page_Number 6 ended
/n
Page_Number 7 started
and there is none to swallow it. countries which
were free have managed to digest it somewhat, but we, who
have just attained our freedom, it is hard to do

same. Therefore, those who think that having attained
freedom they have attained everything, have really attained
nothing! freedom that we have won is yet to be

consolidated.

2. Which article most frequently occurs in the passage? Why is
it so? Can you replace it with some other article? Why / Why
not? Discuss with your peers and make notes.

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
E
4

3. Fill in the blanks with suitable articles.
(a) boy and girl were shopping in a market.

boy was from Kerala and girl was from

Nagaland.
(b) Can you turn off. light?
(c) He has taken____taxito___station.
(d) Is there police station nearby?
(e) My sister works in___ bank.
(f) He has been looking for___job for the last seven years.
(g) Would you like to eat apple?
(h) He goes to the theatre once____ month.

‘ 24 Worbs AND Expressions 2 — Cass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 24 27-Jun-2019 04:20:42 PM

Page_Number 7 ended
/n
Page_Number 8 started
(i) This morning I bought newspaper and

magazine. newspaper is on my table and I forgot
where I have placed magazine.
(j) We would like to have dinner at good restaurant.

EDITING

1. The following passage has an error in each line. Find the
error and write the correct word or words against the line.

I don’t mean that some peoples are born clear headed

and is therefore natural writers, whereas others
are naturally fuzzy and will never wrote well.
Thinking clearly was a conscious act that writers
must forced on themselves, as if they were working
on any other project that requires logic: makes
shopping list or doing an algebra problems.
Good writing do not come naturally,

though most people seems to think it does.
Professional writer are constantly bearded by
people who say they’d like to “trying a little
writing sometime” — meaned when they

retire from their real profession.

1. Your teacher or any one student will read out the text given
below to the whole class. Listen carefully. Working in groups
of four, note down in short the important points as you
listen. Discuss in your group. Recreate and write the text
you have listened to. You need not write the exact text, but
the meaning should be nearest to the actual text read out
to you. Your teacher will read out the text again for all the

Unir 2 — Netson Manpeta: Lon Walk TO FREEDOM

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 25 27-Jun-2019 04:20:43 PM

Page_Number 8 ended
/n
Page_Number 9 started
groups so that you can check whether you have understood
the text well.

Text for listening
A few minutes ago, walking back from lunch, I started to
cross the street when I heard the sound ofa coin dropping.
It wasn’t much but, as I turned my eyes caught the heads
of several other people turning too. A woman had dropped
what appeared to be a one rupee coin. The tinkling sound
of a coin dropping on the pavement grabs attention.
Whatever be the value of the coin no one can ignore
the sound of it. It got me thinking about sounds again.

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
E
4

1. You have read the speeches of Nelson Mandela and Sardar
Patel. You know their beliefs and ideas on freedom and
responsibilities for a new born nation. Discuss with your
partner and put down your ideas on what freedom means to
you. Prepare an outline.

2. Prepare a speech for the morning assembly reflecting on the
following questions.

(a) How do you feel today about the country’s freedom?
(b) Are we free and independent?

(c) Are we serious about our responsibilities as citizens?

‘ 26  Worps AnD Expressions 2 — Cass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 26 27-Jun-2019 04:20:43 PM

Page_Number 9 ended
/n
Page_Number 10 started
— Wrinine

1. Make pairs. One of you takes the role of Nelson Mandela and
the other becomes the interviewer.

(a) The interviewer prepares a questionnaire on Nelson
Mandela—Mandela as a person and his contributions to
the removal of Apartheid.

(b) The interviewee responds to them. The interviewer’s task
is to note down the answers also.

(c) The interviewer, through the questions, tries to get an
overview of Mandela’s life.

Unir 2 — Netson Manpeta: Lon Walk TO FREEDOM

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 27 27-Jun-2019 04:20:43 PM

Page_Number 10 ended
/n
Page_Number 11 started
For interviewer

Questions to be framed

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
E
4

28 | Worps AnD Expressions 2 — CLass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 28 27-Jun-2019 04:20:44 PM


Page_Number 11 ended
/n
Page_Number 12 started
2. Make groups of four and find out the background
information on Nelson Mandela, Mahatma Gandhi, and
Martin Luther King. All three of them fought against all odds
and used non-violence to achieve their aim. Choose any two
of the above stated leaders and do a comparative study of
their principles and lives.

S.No. Leader 1: Leader 2:

1

Unir 2 — Netson Manbea: LONG WALK TO FREEDOM

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 29 27-Jun-2019 04:20:44 PM

Page_Number 12 ended
/n
Page_Number 13 started
- Progecr

1. You have learnt about the freedom struggles of many
nations after the Second World War and how many leaders
spearheaded freedom movements in their countries. Based
on the learning from history and political science, write
about any two leaders from different nations. The following
are prompts that can help you:

(a) Their thoughts
(b) Their uniqueness

(c) Honesty and integrity

XTRAPOLATION

(d) Confidence and leadership qualities

Pl
4,
4

(e) Inspirational speeches

(f) Contributions to free their countries

(Hints: You may develop their profiles in chronological order. You may
visit the library. Consult social science teachers in your school and elders
in your neighbourhood.)

Worps AND Expressions 2 — CLass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-2.indd 30 27-Jun-2019 04:20:44 PM

Page_Number 13 ended
