
Page_Number 0 started
ENGLISH LITERATURE BOOK

(Supplementary Reader)
for
Class X

Written by
Mrs. Harjit Vasudeva
Vetted by
Dr. D.V. Jindal
Edited by
Manoj Kumar (Subject Expert, retired)

fes unsa Uae Ada Va HET
fést wet 3 m3 fear oat TI

PUNJAB SCHOOL EDUCATION BOARD
Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar

Page_Number 0 ended
/n
Page_Number 1 started
© Punjab Government

Revised Edition 2023-24 ............... 2,14,000 copies

All rights, including those of translation, reproduction
and annotation etc., are reserved by the
Punjab Government.

WARNING

The Agency-holders shall not add any extra binding with a view to charge extra money
for the binding. (Ref. Cl. No. 7 of agreement with Agency- holders).

Printing, Publishing, Stocking, Holding or Selling etc., of spurious Text-books qua text-

books printed and published by the Punjab School Education Board is a cognizable
offence under Indian Penal Code.

(The textbooks of the Punjab School Education Board are printed on paper carrying
water mark of the Board.)

fes unsa feadt set oot J!

Published by : Secretary, Punjab School Education Board, Vidya Bhawan, Phase-8, Sahibzada Ajit Singh
Nagar-160062 & Printed by : M/s S. Dinesh & Co. Ram Bagh, Jalandhar.

Page_Number 1 ended
/n
Page_Number 2 started
FOREWORD

The Punjab School Education Board has continuously been engaged in the preparation and
review of syllabi and textbooks. The main objective of preparing language textbooks is to provide
the students with interesting and appropriate reading material. This aims to equip the students with
the skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing so as to enable them to use these in their day

to day life.

The Government of Punjab introduced English as a subject from Class I in the year 1998
due to pressing demand from the field. As a consequence, the Punjab School Education Board
prepared new syllabi for Classes I to X. New textbooks were prepared on the basis of these
syllabi and new series of English Readers for Classes I to X were developed which are presently

being used by all the schools in Punjab. This book is the 10" in the series.

This language package for Class X includes the Main Course Book, the literature book
(Supplementary Reader) and English Grammar & Composition. This Supplementary Reader is
essentially designed to promote in the Learner a love for reading by exposing him to good samples
of English Literature. This book holds up the mirror to the different facets of life to encourage the

learner to read extensively on his/her own.

The book in hand has been prepared by Mrs Harjit Vasudeva, former Director, Regional
Institute of English, Chandigarh and vetted by Dr D.V. Jindal External Faculty Member, Central
Institute of English & Foreign Languages, Hyderabad and edited by Sh. Manoj Kumar (retired),
Subject Expert.

We would gratefully welcome comments and suggestions from teachers, experts and students

as well to improve this book further.

Chairman
Punjab School Education Board

“faa font, nfrarsat as
uje forest fesrar”’ uae |

Page_Number 2 ended
/n
Page_Number 3 started
CONTENTS

S.No. LESSON PAGE NO.
1. Bed Number 29 1
Tariq Rahman

2. Half A Rupee Worth 5
R.K. Narayan

3. One Thousand Dollars 10
O’ Henry

4. The Dying Detective 15
Arthur Conan Doyle

5. How Much Land Does A Man Need ? 21

Leo Tolstoy
6. Return to Air 28

Philippa A Pearce

Page_Number 3 ended
/n
Page_Number 4 started
BED NUMBER-29

Tariq Rahman

A man, whose hobby was painting, met with an accident and lost his eyesight. While he
was in hospital, Naeem, his wardmate, encouraged him to paint again. Naeem described
different scenes and he painted them. Naeem left hospital before the author got his eyesight
back. Who was Naeem and why did he leave the hospital?

Brakes shrieked, something struck, someone cried and there was darkness spreading
all around me. Pain leapt in my whole body and a gentle voice said, “Please don’t move, sir. It
might be dangerous.” I tried to understand what had happened — I recalled the predawn glow;
trees and flowers, the dew bathed grass, — all waiting for the sunrise — I had imprisoned this all on
the canvas, my masterpiece, the joy of life. So I named it ‘Life’ — then I remembered the busy
street scene, the roar of traffic, the car — and the crash. My hand touched the bandages on my
eyes. “No God,” I moaned, “not this.”

My life was a nightmare of sounds, feelings, smells, tastes and dreadful depression. It was a
cage of darkness which held me prisoner—darkness and me, that’s all. Time stood still, the sun
rose no more for me, the bloom of flowers, the streams and the clear sky were just memory. Life
seemed to be dying with me. Hour after hour I would lie on the bed as if staring at the ceiling.
“How do you do?” He was my wardmate, Naeem, who was known as Number Twenty Nine,
that being the number of his bed. A soft-spoken, cheerful man who comforted me with many a
story, diverting my mind from the shocking realities of life. Except he limped and was on Bed No.
29, I hardly knew anything about him. He wonderfully described the birds hopping among smiling
brightness of the morning that I imagined I could see the scene myself. “Go on,” I would urge,
whenever his voice stopped. Thus he would minutely describe the scene outside his windows the
whole day. This gave hope to me.

“Listen”, he said one morning. “Start painting, which, as you said, was your hobby before.”
I lashed out at him. I shouted, getting hysterical, that he had no right to joke about my art. He
limped away to his bed.

Days passed. Then one day I asked him if he had been moved by anything. “Yes,” he
began slowly, “well, many things.” He suddenly brightened. “Ah yes! Once I walked by a farmhouse,
on a golden October evening and | saw a haystack. It wasn’t straw, it was pure gold. All around
the world was ablaze with colour — red leaves, white ducks, basking in the last golden rays of the
sun setting on the blood-red west. There I stood and gasped, unable to move” — “What?” I cried,
“didn’t you paint it?” There was an uneasy silence which embarrassed me for having asked such a
question, after all, I thought, everyone is not an artist. “I mean, I would have painted it,” I said

Page_Number 4 ended
/n
Page_Number 5 started
2 LITERATURE BOOK

hurriedly. “Why don’t you paint? It is in my mind, and I know you can paint. Do, please, say
yes.” He pleaded, and before I knew what I did, I said, “Yes”.

My life took a new turn. He had provided everything needed for painting, and when the
hospital attendants cried out in surprise as they entered the room, he made them quiet. Then the
miracle started, with eager but almost trembling finger, I started drawing a scene I had once
admired. I laboured on and on sketching the scene from the canvas of my memory on the paper,
too absorbed to think of my blindness. I finished the scene and in a shaky voice called for Naeem.
He bounded to my bed, for a while I heard nothing. My heart sank. “I must have bungled it,” I
thought. Then his voice broke the silence. “It’s marvellous. It’s unbelievable, you’re a genius, man,
a genius, who would say you are blind,” I felt relaxed and I said, “Really! I could never believe,
had it not happened with myself.”

Every morning, after breakfast, Naeem would come to my bed, in a dreamy voice he would
describe a scene, which I would work from dawn to dusk, as if the day would never end. One
canvas finished and another started. It was wonderful. Naeem would make me draw all the magic
dreamland scenery. Losing myself in his world of colours, forgetting my blindness, I created on
paper all he said. He always praised me and I became more and more convinced of my genius.
He would himself mix the colours, and suggest a faint shade here, a dark line there.

It was then that the doctors operated upon me again. Naeem had taken over the work of
reading to me, or describing a scene from my window, as I was unable to move from the bed. As
days passed, my anxiety increased — partly because I wanted to see the world of colours with my
own eyes, but mostly because I had spent my last rupee on this very operation, and in case of
failure, I would have to lead the wretched life of darkness and misery.

I went to the doctors’ room with the nurse, when Naeem came and said, “It’s a beautiful
day, I hope you see it soon.” I tried to answer but there was a lump in my throat.

I smelt the smell of the operation theatre, I felt gloved hand touching me gently. My bandage
was being unwound. The clock ticked and a voice said, “Open your eyes” and I opened my eyes.
There was the same unending darkness.

I was back in my room, helped by the nurse. So there was my life — full of darkness. I
buried my head in the pillow. Naeem was on my side - consoling me. “I will be going soon,
Naeem,” I said sadly one day. “I have no money now, this operation cost me all I had.” He was
shocked. “Oh No! I have some money, you can have it,” he said softly. I replied firmly, “Thanks,
Naeem. I have never begged nor will I, thanks all the same.” He tried to persuade me, but I
didn’t listen.

One afternoon, Naeem came running to my bed, “Listen, old fellow, there is a friend of
mine who is an art lover. He wants to buy your paintings.” “How can that be, they must be
awful!” I thought. “He is rich, we can strike a bargain.” I consented and Naeem danced round the
room with joy. Next day he handed me some crisp bank notes. My happiness knew no bounds.
Hope soared once again. Once again I was living for something.

Page_Number 5 ended
/n
Page_Number 6 started
LITERATURE BOOK 3

I took to painting again. Every morning Naeem would sit by my side, and begin his dreamy
tale. I drew on and on. The unknown buyer appeared off and on and bought my paintings. Naeem
described scenes of the four seasons with such feelings, especially the sunset ones — pink, purple,
white, violet and all shades of gold were splashed before my ‘mind’s eye’ .

All my paintings had been bought, and I found myself ready for the third operation. After
the operation, when I regained consciousness, I was told not to move or speak with anyone.
When my bandage was to be opened I asked for Naeem, but the nurse said he was ill, and could
not come. The doctor removed the bandage and when I opened my eyes, a flash of light tore
through my eyes — I could see.

They wheeled me back to my room. I cried, “Naeem, Naeem. Sister, where is Naeem?”
The nurse’s face turned pale as she handed me Naeem’s letter — “The goddess of art smiled on
me, and then as quickly as she had come she vanished. Mad with grief, I rushed to the cupboard,
and there lay all my paintings. Mere masses of haphazard lines, without any colour. The nurse
spoke, “He was a very great man. With all his money he bought these paintings, and moved out of
the hospital when he couldn’t afford it. He couldn’t have his third operation.”

“What,” I cried, “operation? Which operation?”

“Why? His eyes, of course, he was blind,” she said. I was unable to move for sometime.
Tears blinded my eyes.

Under his pillow were four paintings he had painted of the four seasons before he was
blind. He described those paintings to me — and tried to paint them on my canvas. Tears blinded
my eyes as I held his paintings in my hand.

A. GLOSSARY

shrieked : made a loud noise

nightmare : unpleasant situation

divert : to take someone’s attention away from something
lashed out : criticized in anger, spoke angrily
hysterical _: shouted in an uncontrolled way
ablaze : full of bright colours

gasped : took a deep breath
embarrassed: ashamed

laboured : worked hard

absorbed _: interested in something

bounded : ran with long steps

bungled : did something very badly
marvellous : wonderful

lump : feel pressure in the throat
consented : agreed

off and on : from time to time

haphazard: irregular, not in order

Page_Number 6 ended
/n
Page_Number 7 started
4

LITERATURE BOOK

B. COMPREHENSION QUESTIONS

1.
2.
3.

How did the author of ‘Bed Number-29” lose his eyesight ?
What did the author of ‘Bed Number-29’ do before he lost his eyesight ?

Who did the author of ‘Bed Number-29’ meet in the hospital ward? Why was he
there?

4. When did the author regain his confidence and how?

. What happened when the author’s second operation failed? Who consoled him then?
. How did the author of ‘Bed Number-29’ get the money to get operated the third time ?

Who helped him ?

. Where was Naeem when the author regained his eyesight?

8. Did the author know that Naeem was also blind like him? Give reasons to support your

answer.

. Why could Naeem not get his treatment done?
. How did the author feel when he learnt that Naeem had left the hospital because he had

no money for the treatment?

. How could Naeem describe different seasons in detail?

. What does the message “The goddess of art smiled on me.... and then it vanished”

mean?

C. DISCUSSION

What would you like to be - the author or Naeem? Discuss it with your group.

D. FURTHER READING

‘The Thief’s Story’ by Ruskin Bond

fan py
A3U72K

ek ok a

Page_Number 7 ended
/n
Page_Number 8 started
HALF A RUPEE WORTH

R.K. Narayan

Subbiah, a rich merchant, sold rice at a price. A poor man approached him for half - a rupee

worth of rice. Did the merchant give him rice?

Subbiah sold rice at the market gate. In his shop you found, heaped in wicker baskets,
all varieties: from pebbly coarse rice to Delhi Samba, white as jasmine and slender as a needle.
His shop was stuffy and dark but he loved every inch of it. He loved the smell of gunny sack,
of rice and husk. Through good times and bad he flourished. There were days of drought when
paddy didn’t come up and the rice mills were silenced, when people looked hollow- eyed and
half dead. But even then he never closed his shop. If he didn’t find stuff for twenty baskets, he
scoured the countryside and filled at least two baskets, and sold them. There were times when
the harvest was so rich he could hardly accept a quarter of the grain that was offered, when it
seemed a fool’s business to be , selling rice. If you sold rice all day and night you could not

hope for a profit of even fifty rupees. They called it ‘depression in the trade’.

But Subbiah survived all ups and downs. Rice was in his blood. He had served as an
unpaid apprentice when his father ruled. Those were days when Subbiah loathed the rice bags.
He longed for the crowded streets, cinemas, football matches and wrestling tournaments, which
he saw through the crowded shop door. But his father more or less kept him chained to the
shop and discouraged his outside interests. ‘Boys should be horsewhipped if they are not to
become brigands.’ He practised this theory of child-training with such steadfastness that in due
course the little man had no eyes or head for anything except rice and the market. When his
father died, he slid in so nicely that nobody noticed the difference. Most people thought that

the old man was still there counting cash. Business prospered.

Subbiah kept five prized cows and buffaloes whose milk, curd and butter he and his wife
and five children had day and night, and then became rotund and balloon-like. He owned thirty
acres of land in a nearby village, and visited it once a month to survey his possessions and
make sure they were intact. He lent money at exorbitant rates of interest and if people failed to
pay he acquired their houses. He became swollen with money. He sent his children to a school,
bought them brocaded caps and velvet coats, and paid a home-tutor to shout the lessons at the
top of his voice every evening under a lamp in the hall. He loaded his wife with gold ornaments
and draped her in gaudy Benares silk; he added on to his house two more storeys and several
halls and painted all the walls with a thick blue oil paint, and covered them with hundreds of

pictures of gods in gilt frames. All day he sat by his iron safe and kept shoving money into it,

Page_Number 8 ended
/n
Page_Number 9 started
6 LITERATURE BOOK

watching closely at the same time his assistants measuring out rice into gunny sacks; he led a satisfying
life. There seemed no reason why it should not go on through eternity - the same set of activities and
interests, going on and one or the other of his sons to acquire his shape and appearance and continue

the family business.

Tt might have continued thus but for the War. It seemed at first to be the end of civilization, but
after the first shock, it proved not so unwelcome after all. His profits piled up as never before. Saigon
and Burma ceased to send rice, and that meant the stock he held was worth its weight in gold. People
flocked to his shop at all hours. He bought the big house next door for a godown and then the next
one and the next; and then bought a dozen more villages. War seemed, on the whole, a very beneficial
force till the introduction of Price and Food Control. For the first time in his life he was worried. He

could not see how anyone had the right to say what he should sell and at what rate. He felt happy

when he heard someone say, ‘The Food Department is a hoax. The government is making a mess of
things.’

He soon found that he could still survive under a new garb. By waiting before officials, and
seeing people, and filling up forms, he was soon allowed to continue his business as a Fair Price
Grain Depot. He groaned unhappily when he learnt that he had to surrender all the rice his peasants
cultivated in his village fields. The whole thing seemed to him atrocious. “They have to fix the price
for my produce! They have to give me permission to take what I myself produce!” but he accepted
the position without much outward protest. He slept little and lost the taste for food. All through the
dark nights he thought about this problem. Finally, he had a solution. He cried to himself, “I still have
my rice in the fields, and I still have the bags in my godown. After all, what does the government
want? To have things in nice shape on paper? That they shall have.” He kept all the rice he wanted
for sale and personal use but out of sight and out of paper. He had to give away a lot of money to
people who came to examine his stock and accounts. If he passed a ten-rupee currency note on
such an occasion, it meant he had screened from prying eyes a thousand rupees worth of grain. When
he thought it over, he realized that all controls were really a boon. He distributed a few annas for
charity twice a week, and broke a coconut at the temple on Fridays in appreciation of God’s interest
in his affairs. Gradually, with experience, he became a master of his situation. At his depot, he measured
out rice with a deft hand, so that at the end of a day a considerable quantity accumulated which was
nobody’s, and then he delayed and opened and closed and reopened his shop in such a manner as
to make people come to him several times before they could get any rice out of him : when they had
money he had no stock, or when he had rice they had no money. By all this, he accumulated a vast
quantity of rice every week; and then out of his village harvest only a small portion reached the Food
Department. Very soon he converted one of his houses in a back street into a godown and there
piled up rice bags from floor to ceiling. It was supposed to be a store of waste paper and rags,

which he collected for the paper mills.

Page_Number 9 ended
/n
Page_Number 10 started
LITERATURE BOOK 7

He never sold his rice except in a small quantity, and to known customers. He took their cash
in advance and told them to call later. He always threw in a doubt; ‘There was a person who had a
little rice. I don’t know if he still has it. Anyway, leave the cash with me.’ Sometimes, he returned the
money with, “Sorry, not available, the man said he had it, but you know we can never count on these
things nowadays”.

One evening, as he had just closed his shop and started out with the key in his pocket, a person
halted before him and said, “Oh! You have closed. Just my luck.”

“T have other business now, no time to stop and talk’, said Subbiah. He went past him. The
other man followed him. He held him by the arm and cried: ““You must open your shop and give me
rice. I can’t let you go. My two children are crying for food. They and my old mother have been
starving. My ration card was exhausted three days ago. I can’t see them in that condition any more”.
“Please somehow give me some rice. I have gone round and round the whole town today, but I
couldn’t get a grain anywhere. At home they will be thinking I’m returning with something. They will...
God knows what they’!] do when they see me go back empty- handed.”

“How much do you want?”

“Give me a seer. There are six mouths to feed at home.’

“How much have you?” The man held up a half-rupee coin. Subbiah looked at the coin with
contempt. “You expect to get one seer of rice for this?”

“But it’s three seers for a rupee, isn’t it?”

“Don’t talk of all that now. You will starve if you talk of controlled price and such nonsense.”
He felt enraged. “If you have another eight annas, perhaps, you may get a seer,” said Subbiah.

The other shook his head: “ This is the end of the month, you see, this is all I have.”

“You will get only half a seer. That’s the price a man I know will-demand.”

“All right,” the other said. “Better than nothing.”

“Give the coin here,” said Subbiah. He took the coin. “ Don’t follow me; that fellow is suspicious.
He will say no the moment he sees anyone with me. You wait here, I will be back, but I can’t promise.
Ifhe says no, it will be just your luck, that is all. Give me the coin.”

He was gone with the eight annas and the man stood on the street corner.

Three hours had gone by and yet there was no sign of Subbiah. The night had deepened. The
man began to mutter several times to himself, ““ Well, what has happened, where is he? Where has he
gone? When am I to go home and cook the rice? The children, ah, the children.” He turned and
walked in the direction the other had gone but that took him nowhere, because the other had pretended
to go that way in order not to show where his secret godown was, but actually had turned and gone
off in another direction. The man wandered up and down through the silent streets and went back to
the main shop, hoping he might be there. He wasn’t there either. The lock was still on the door, just
as he had seen it before. Then he called at Subbiah’s house. He knocked at the door. Subbiah’s wife
opened it. He asked, “Is Subbiah at home?”

Page_Number 10 ended
/n
Page_Number 11 started
8 LITERATURE BOOK

“No. He hasn’t come home at all.” She looked very anxious. By six next morning they became
nervous, and in that condition she could not help, saying, “Have you looked for him at the other
godown?”

“Where is it?’

She had to tell, being the only person who knew its whereabouts. They started out. After passing
through some bylanes, they came upon the building. The door was bolted from inside. They knocked
on it. Finally they had to break open the front ventilator, slip a boy through it, and then have the main
door opened. A faint morning light came in through the broken ventilator. In a corner they saw an
electric torch lying on the floor and then a half-rupee coin, and a little of a hand stuck out of a pile of
fallen bags.

A. GLOSSARY

stuffy : without much fresh air
drought : period of time when there is a little or no rain
scoured : searched the place thoroughly

depression : period of little economic activity
loathed : disliked
brigands _ : thieves, criminals

prospered: became successful

intact : complete-not damaged

rotund : round (fat body)

exorbitant : much too high

brocade : thick cloth with gold and silver material

gaudy : too bright, lacking taste

gilt : thin layer of gold used on any surface for decoration
ceased : stopped

hoax : something made to look true, though .. is not
waiting > serving

atrocious: shocking, brutal

produce(n) : things that have been grown like wheat, rice, etc
deft > skilful

accumulated : increased, gathered more and more

Page_Number 11 ended
/n
Page_Number 12 started
LITERATURE BOOK 9

B. COMPREHENSION QUESTIONS

1.
2.

How did Subbiah manage to get rice during the drought?

“Those were the days when Subbiah loathed the rice bags’ Which were those days ? Why
did he dislike the rice then?

. ‘Rice was in his blood’ means

(a) he ate nothing but rice (b) he liked the smell of rice
(c) he knew all about rice

. How did Subbiah’s profits increase during the war? Did he follow the rules laid down

by the government? How did he tackle the officers?

5. Besides selling rice what else did Subbiah do to earn more?

. Who came to buy rice one evening when Subbiah was about to go home? Did he

give rice to him? What did he say?

7. How much rice did Subbiah agree to sell to him and for how much?
8. Why did Subbiah ask the man to wait? What reasons did he give?
9. Where did Subbiah go to get the rice?

. Did the man wait for Subbiah for long? How do you know?

. Where did the man go then? Where was he taken and by whom?
. How did Subbiah die?

. Tick the qualities that Subbiah possessed.

(a) a hard-working man (b) a cruel father (c) a miser (d) an obedient son (e) a

sympathetic shop keeper (f) a religious man (g) an honest citizen

C. DISCUSSION

1.
2.

Only the dishonest can prosper. Speak for and against the statement.

Greed can ruin a man. Discuss.

D. SUGGESTED READING

“Volpone’ by Ben Jonson

oh oh ah 3h

Page_Number 12 ended
/n
Page_Number 13 started
ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS

O’Henry

Robert Gillian received one thousand dollars from his uncles will-that too with a condition. What was

the condition? What did he do with the money? Did he spend it sensibly?

“One thousand dollars” repeated Lawyer Tolman, solemnly and severely, “and here is
the money.”

Young Gillian laughed as he touched the thin packet of new fifty-dollar notes. “It is such
a little amount,” he told the lawyer.

“You heard the reading of your uncle’s will,” continued Lawyer Tolman in a dry tone. “I
do not know if you paid any attention to its details. I must tell you that you must give us an
account of the manner of expenditure of these one thousand dollars as soon as you have spent
them. I trust you will comply with the late Mr Gillian’s wishes.”

“You may depend upon it,” said the young man, politely, “I may have to have a secretary. I
was never good at accounts.”

Gillian thrust the packet of notes in his pocket and went to the club. There he looked for the
person whom he called Old Bryson.

Old Bryson was calm at forty. He was in a corner reading a book, and when he saw Gillian
coming he sighed, laid down his book and took off his glasses.

“Old Bryson, wake up,” said Gillian, “I’ve a funny story to tell you.”

“T wish you tell your story to someone in the billiard room, Gillian,” said Old Bryson.

“This one is better one than usual,” said Gillian, rolling a cigarette, “and I’m going to
tell it to you. It’s too sad and funny to go with the game. I’ve just, come from the office of my
uncle’s lawyers. He leaves me a thousand dollars. Now, what can a man possibly do with just
a thousand dollars?”

“T thought,” said Old Bryson, “that the late Septimas Gillian was worth something like
half a million dollars.”

“He was,” said Gillian, joyously, “and that’s where the joke comes in. He left almost all
his money to a microbe. That is, the part of it goes to a man who invents a new bacillus and
the rest to a hospital for doing away with that microbe. The butler and the housekeeper get a
seal ring and $10 each. His nephew gets $1,000.”

“You’ve always had a plenty of money to spend,” said Old Bryson.

o)

“Tons,” said Gillian. “Uncle was the fairy godmother as far as an allowance was

concerned.”

Page_Number 13 ended
/n
Page_Number 14 started
LITERATURE BOOK 11

“Any other heirs?” asked Old Bryson.

“None”, Gillian frowned and kicked the divan uneasily. “There is a Miss Hayden, a ward of
my uncle, who lived in his house. I forget to tell you that she gets a seal ring and $10, too. What a

joke! Don’t be insulting, Old Bryson — tell me what a fellow can do with a thousand dollars?”

Old Bryson rubbed his glasses and smiled. And when he smiled Gillian knew that he was going

to be more offensive than ever.

“A thousand dollars,” he said, “means much or little. One may buy a happy home with it. A
thousand dollars would buy pure milk for one hundred babies during June, July and August and
save fifty of their lives. You could have half an hour fun in one of the art galleries. It will provide an
education to an ambitious boy. You could move to a New Hampshire town and live respectably

for two years on it.”

“People might like you if you won’t moralize. I asked you to tell me what I could do with

the one thousand dollars,” said Gillian.

“You?” said Old Bryson; with a gentle laugh, “Why Bobby Gillian, there is only one sensible
thing that you can do. You can buy Miss Lotta Lauriere a diamond pendant and spend the rest of

your time in a ranch.”

“Thanks,” said Gillian rising, “I thought I could depend on you, Old Bryson. You gave me
the right idea. I wanted to spend the money in a lump. No need to keep a big account then. I hate
that.”

Gillian phoned for a cab, and asked the driver to take him to the Columbine Theatre. Miss
Lotta Lauriere was almost ready for the show when her dresser mentioned Mr Gillian’s name. “Let
him in,” said Miss Lauriere. “Now what is it, Bobby?” she said looking quite bored, “I’m going to
perform in two minutes.” “I won’t take two minutes,” said Gillian. “What about a pendant? I can

spend three ciphers with a figure in front of them?”

“Oh just as you say, Bobby, did you see the necklace Della Stacey was wearing the other

night? Two thousand two hundred dollars it cost,” she said. And she left for her performance.

Gillian went to the cab. “What would you do if you had a thousand dollars?” He asked the
driver. “Open a saloon,” answered the driver at once. “I would make money with both hands. Are

”

you thinking of........... .
“Oh, no,” said Gillian, “merely asked for curiosity. Drive on till I ask you to stop.”

Eight blocks down the Broadway, Gillian saw a blind man selling pencils on the sidewalk.

Gillian got out of the cab and stood before him.

Page_Number 14 ended
/n
Page_Number 15 started
12 LITERATURE BOOK

“Excuse me,” he said, “but, tell me what you would do if you had a thousand dollars?”

“You have got down the cab just now? Take a look at this, if you like,” said the blind man
and took out a small book from his pocket. Gillian opened it and saw it was a bank deposit book.
It showed a balance of $1,785 to the blind man’s credit. Gillian returned the book and got into the
cab.

“Tolman & Sharp, at-, Broadway,” he told the driver.

“T beg your pardon,” said Gillian cheerfully, “but may I ask one question? Hope you won’t
mind. Was Miss Hayden left anything by my uncle’s will besides the ring and $10?”

“Nothing,” said Mr. Tolman.
“T thank you very much, sir,” said Gillian and out he went into his cab.

When Gillian reached his uncle’s house, Miss Hayden was writing letters in the library. She
was small and slender and dressed in black. “I’ve just come from Tolman’s office,” he explained.
“They found a post-script to the will. It seemed that uncle on second thoughts loosened a bit and
willed you a thousand dollars. As I was driving this way, Tolman asked me to bring the money. Here
it is.” Gillian laid the money on the table.

Miss Hayden turned white. “Oh! I am sorry,” said Miss Hayden, taking up her money. “I am
sorry,” she said again. “There is no use?” said Gillian, almost light-heartedly. “May I write a note?”
asked Gillian, with a smile. She gave him the paper and then went back to her work. Gillian made an
account of his expenditure of the thousand dollars in these words:

“Paid by the black sheep, Robert Gillian, $1,000 on the account of eternal happiness, to
the best and dearest woman on earth.”

Gillian slipped his writing into an envelope, bowed and went his way.
His cab stopped at the office of Tolman & Sharp.

“T have spent the thousand dollars,” he said cheerfully to Mr Tolman, “and I have come to give
you the account.” He tossed the envelope on the table. Without touching the envelope, Mr Tolman
went to the door and called his partner, Sharp. Together they discussed something. Finally Mr Tolman
said, “Mr Gillian, your uncle had left another envelope which was to be opened after you had submitted
an account of spending the $1,000 bequest in the will. As you have given the account, my partner
and I read the content of the envelope. We will not give you the details. But the gist is that if you
have spent the hundred dollars wisely, we have the power to release you $5,000 kept for you. But
if you spent the money the same way as you did in the past, the $5,000 will be paid to Miriam Hayden,
the ward of the late Mr Gillian. Now, Mr Gillian, we will examine your account in regard to $1,000.”
Mr Tolman reached for the envelope. Gillian was a little quicker in taking it up. He tore the account
and its cover and dropped them into his pocket.

“Tt’s all right,” he said smiling. There is no need to bother you with this. Anyhow, I lost the
thousand dollars on the races. Good-day to you, gentlemen.”

Page_Number 15 ended
/n
Page_Number 16 started
LITERATURE BOOK 17

“T have never heard of the name,” I said.

“Well, he is the man who has the knowledge of this disease — but he is not a medical man. He
is a planter. He lives in Sumatra, now visiting London. I didn’t want you to go before six, because
you wouldn’t have found him in his study. I hope you will be able to persuade him to come. You will
tell him exactly how you have left me.” He said, “You must tell him that I’m dying-plead with him,
Watson.”

“T’ll bring him in a cab,” I said.

“No. You will persuade him to come and return before him. Make any excuse. Remember
this, Watson.”

I saw Mrs Hudson was waiting outside, trembling and crying. Below, as I waited for the cab,
I met Inspector Morton of the Scotland Yard. He was not in his uniform.

“How is he?” he asked.

“He is very ill,” I answered.

I reached Mr Culverton Smith’s house. The butler appeared at the doorway. Through the half-
open door I heard a man’s voice telling the butler, “I am not at home, say so.” I pushed past the
butler and entered the room. I saw a frail man with bald head sitting. “I am sorry,” I said, “but the
matter cannot be delayed. Mr Sherlock Holmes..............

The mere mention of his name had a different effect on the man.

“Have you come from Holmes? How is he?” he asked.

“He is very ill. That is why I have come. Mr Holmes has a high opinion of you and thought you
are the only man in London who can help him.”

The little man was startled.

“Why? He asked.

“Because of your knowledge of the Eastern diseases,” I replied.

“How did he get it?” he asked.

I told him everything. He smiled and agreed to come. Pretending that I had some other
appointment, I left him. With a sinking heart I reached Holmes’ room. I told him that Mr Smith
was coming.

“Well done! Watson!” he said. “You have done everything that a good friend could do.
Now you disappear to the next room. And don’t speak, or come here.”

I heard the footsteps. I heard a voice say, “Holmes! Holmes! Can you hear me?”

“Ts that you Mr Smith?” Holmes whispered. “You know what is wrong with me. You are
the only one in London who can cure me.”

“Do you know the symptoms?” asked Smith.

Page_Number 16 ended
/n
Page_Number 17 started
18 LITERATURE BOOK

“Only too well, Mr Smith,” and he described the symptoms.

“They are the same, Holmes,” Smith said. “Poor Victor was a dead man on the fourth day-a
strong and healthy young man. What a coincidence indeed!”
“T know that you did it,” said Holmes.

“Well, you can’t prove it.”
“Give me water, please,” Holmes groaned.
“Here” I heard Smith’s voice.

“Cure me, please. Well, about Victor Smith’s death. You did it. Pll forget everything, but cure

me. I’Il forget about it.”

“You can forget or remember, just as you like. It doesn’t matter to me how my nephew died.

Watson said you got it from the Chinese sailors. Could there be any other reason?”
“T can’t think. My mind is gone, help me,” pleaded Holmes.
“Did anything come by post? A box by chance? On Wednesday?”
“Yes I opened it and there was a sharp spring inside it. A joke perhaps. It drew blood,” said

Holmes.

“No, it was not a joke, you fool,” you’ve got it. Who asked you to cross my path? You knew
too much about Victor’s death. Your end is near, Holmes. I’Il carry this box in my pocket. The last

piece of evidence!”
“Turn up the gas, Smith,” said Holmes in his natural voice.

“Yes I will, so that I can see you better.” There was silence. Then I heard Smith say, “What’s
all this?”

“Successful acting, “said Holmes, “for three days I didn’t taste anything — neither food nor drink.”

There were footsteps outside. The door opened and I heard Inspector Morton’s voice. “I arrest

you on charge of murder,” he said.
“And attempt of murder of Sherlock Holmes, too,” laughed Holmes.

There was a sudden rush and scuffle, followed by the clash of iron and sudden cry of pain.

There was a click of handcuffs. Holmes asked me to come in.

“Sorry, Watson, I was rude to you. I undermined your capability as a doctor. It was just to get
Smith here. And I didn’t want you to know that I was not ill.”

“But your appearance —— ?” I said.

“Three days, fasting and the make-up did the trick. And the gas was turned up to give a signal

to Morton to come.”

“The coins?”

Page_Number 17 ended
/n
Page_Number 18 started
LITERATURE BOOK 19

“Oh! That was only to prove that I was delirious,” he laughed. “I need to eat now, Watson.
Mr Smith killed his nephew and he wanted to kill me the same way to avoid imprisonment. I need to
eat now, Watson, And thank you, Watson,” he said.

[simplified]

A. GLOSSARY

horrified : shocked

gaunt : very thin (usually because of illness)
flushed : red

twitch : sudden quick movement

croaking  : low, harsh sound, like the sound frogs make

contagious : spreading quickly to others

advancing : moving forward

bolted : suddenly rushed forward

half-crown : an old British coin

tongs : a tool (like scissors) used for picking or holding things
delirious —_: astate in which a person is not able to think or speak clearly
Eastern : from Eastern countries e.g. China, Cambodia

coincidence : two things happening at the same time by chance
natural : normal

appearance : look

B. COMPREHENSION QUESTIONS

. Who was Mrs Hudson? Why did she go to Watson’s house?
. Where did Holmes get the illness from? When did he get it?

. What was Holmes’ condition when Watson saw him?

. Why did he not let Watson examine him?

. Till when was Watson asked to stay in Holmes house?

. Why did Holmes not let Watson touch his things? What did Watson think about Holmes
then?

Dn nn fF WN

—

. What did Holmes ask Watson to do before leaving his room?
8. Who was Culverton Smith? Why did Holmes want him for the treatment of his disease?
9. What did Holmes ask Watson to say to Mr Smith?

10. Did Smith welcome Watson calling on him? How do you know?

Page_Number 18 ended
/n
Page_Number 19 started
LITERATURE BOOK

. Why did Watson not come back with Smith?

. Why did Smith ask Watson when he finally met him ?

. Did Smith go near Holmes to examine him? How do you know?

. Who was Victor Smith? What had happened to him and how?

. “You did it. ’ll forget everything,” Holmes said to Smith. What did Smith do and how?

Did Holmes really mean what he said? Give examples in support of your answer.

. Why did Smith send infected sharp spring in an ivory box?

. Why did Holmes ask Smith to turn up the gas?

. Who arrested Smith? What were the charges against him?

. Why did Holmes pretend to be ill? What did he do and say to appear ill?
. Should Holmes have spoken so rudely to Watson? Why?

C. DISCUSSION

Holmes did not disclose his plan to Watson though he was his assistant. Was it justified?

Discuss.

D. SUGGESTED READING

“The Midnight Visitor’ by Robert Arthur


Page_Number 19 ended
/n
Page_Number 20 started
HOW MUCH LAND
DOES A MAN NEED?

Leo Tolstoy

Leo Tolstoy (1828-1910) is one of the best known of Russian writers. He wrote many novels, short stories
and an autobiography called My Confessions. He is primarily famous for classics like War and Peace
(1869) and Anna Karenina (1877).

How Much Land Does a Man Need ? illustrates the emptiness that lies beneath the growing
material ambition of man. The ironical and inevitable fate that awaits material pursuit is

underscored with the concluding line, ‘Six feet from his head to his heels was all he needed.’

[1]

An elder sister came to visit her younger sister in the country. The elder was married to
a tradesman in town, the younger to a peasant in the village. As the sisters sat over their tea
talking, the elder began to boast of the advantages of town life : saying how comfortably they
lived there, how well they dressed, what fine clothes her children wore, and what good things

they ate and drank. The younger sister was piqued.

“T would not change my way of life for yours,’ said she, ““We may live roughly, but at least we
are free from anxiety. You live in better style than we do, but though you often earn more than you
need, you are very likely to lose all you have. You know the proverb, “Loss and gain are brothers
twain.” It often happens that people who are wealthy one day, are begging their bread the next.Our
way is safer. Though a peasant’s life is not a fat one, it is a long one. We shall never grow rich, but
we shall always have enough to eat.”

Pakhom, the master of the house, was listening to the women’s chatter.

“Tt is perfectly true,” thought he. “Busy as we are from childhood tilling mother earth, we peasants
have no time to let any nonsense settle in our heads. Our only trouble is that we haven’t land enough.
IfI had plenty of land, I shouldn’t fear the Devil himself!”

The women finished their tea, chatted a while about dress, and then cleared away the tea-
things and lay down to sleep.

But the Devil had been sitting behind the store, and had heard all that was said. He was pleased
that the peasant’s wife had led her husband into boasting, and that he had said that if he had plenty
of land, he would not fear the Devil himself.

Page_Number 20 ended
/n
Page_Number 21 started
» LITERATURE BOOK

“All right,” thought the Devil. “We will have a tussle. I’ll give you land enough; and by means
of that land I will get you into my power.”

Close to the village there lived a lady, a small landowner who had an estate of about three
hundred acres. In the winter the news got about that the lady was going to sell her land. Pakhom
heard that a neighbour of his was buying fifty acres, and that the lady had consented to accept one
half in cash and to wait a year for the other half. Pakhom felt envious.

“Look at that,” thought he “the land is all being sold, and I shall get none of it.” So he spoke
to his wife. ‘Other people are buying,” said he, “and we must also buy twenty acres, or so. Life is
becoming impossible.”

So they put their heads together and considered how they could manage to buy it. They had
one hundred roubles laid by. They sold a colt, and one half of their bees, hired out one of their sons
as a labourer and took his wages in advance; borrowed the rest from a brother-in-law, and so scraped
together half the purchase money.

Having done this, Pakhom chose out a farm of forty acres, some of it wooded, and went to
the lady to bargain for it. They came to an agreement, and he shook hands with her upon it and paid
her a deposit in advance. Then they went to town and signed the deeds; he paying half the price
down, and undertaking to pay the remainder within two years.

So now Pakhom had land of his own. He borrowed seeds, and sowed them on the land he
had bought. The harvest was a good one, and within a year he had managed to pay off his debts
both to the lady and to his brother-in-law. So he became a landowner, ploughing and sowing his

own land, making hay on his own land, cutting his own trees, and feeding his cattle on his own

Lm]

One day Pakhom was sitting at home when a peasant, passing through the village, happened

pasture.

to call in. He was allowed to stay during the night, and supper was given to him. Pakhom had a talk
with this peasant and asked him where he came from. The stranger answered that he came from
beyond the Volga, where he had been working. One word led to another, and the man went on to
say that many people were settling in those parts. The land was so good, he said, that the rye sown
on it grew as high as a horse, and so thick that five cuts of a sickle made a sheaf. One peasant, he
said, had brought nothing with him but his bare hands, and now he had six horses and two cows of
his own.

Pakhom’s heart kindled with desire. He thought : “Why should I suffer in this narrow hole, if
one can live so well elsewhere? I will sell my land and my homestead here, and with the money I will
start afresh over there and get everything new. In this crowded place one is always having trouble.

But I must first go and find out all about it myself.”

Page_Number 21 ended
/n
Page_Number 22 started
LITERATURE BOOK 23

Towards summer he got ready and started. He went down the Volga on a steamer to Samara,
then walked another three hundred miles on foot, and at last reached the place. It was just as the
stranger had said. The peasants had plenty of land. Anyone who had money could buy land at two

shillings an acre as much good freehold land as he wanted.

Having found out all he wished to know, Pakhom returned home. As autumn came on, he began
selling off his belongings. He sold his land at a profit, sold his homestead and all his cattle. He only

waited till the spring, and then started with his family for the new settlement.

As soon as Pakhom and his family reached their new abode, he put up the buildings he needed,
and bought cattle. He now had three times as much as at his former home, and the land was good
cornland. He was ten times better off than he had been. He had plenty of land, and could keep as
many heads of cattle as he liked.

Pakhom was pleased with it all, but when he got used to it he began to think that even here he
had not enough land. The first year, he sowed wheat on his land and had a good crop. After a time
Pakhom noticed that some peasant-dealers were living on separate farms and were growing wealthy;
and he thought: “If I were to buy some more land it would be different thing altogether.” The question
of buying more land recurred to him again and again.

So Pakhom began looking out for land which he could buy; and he came across a peasant
who had bought thirteen hundred acres, but having got into difficulties was willing to sell again cheap.
Pakhom bargained and haggled with him, and at last they settled the price at 1,500 roubles, part in
cash and part to be paid later. They had all but clinched the matter when a passing dealer happened
to stop at Pakhom’s one day to get a feed for his horses. He drank tea with Pakhom and they had
a talk. The dealer said that he was just returning from the land of the Bashkirs, far away, where he
had bought thirteen thousand acres of land, all for 1,000 roubles. Pakhom questioned him further, and
the tradesman said :

“All one needs do is to make friends with the chiefs. I gave away about one hundred roubles
worth of silk robes and carpets, besides a case of tea, and I gave wine to those who would drink
it; and I got the land for less than a penny an acre.” And he showed Pakhom the title-deeds,
saying :

“The land lies near a river, and the whole prairie is virgin soil.”

Pakhom plied him with questions, and the tradesman said:

“There is more land there than you could cover if you walked a year, and it all belongs to the
Bashkirs. They are as simple as sheep, and land can be got almost for nothing.”

“There is more land,” thought Pakhom, “with my one thousand roubles, why should I get only
thirteen hundred acres, and saddle myself with a debt besides? If I take it out there, I can get more

than ten times as much for the money.”

Page_Number 22 ended
/n
Page_Number 23 started
4 LITERATURE BOOK

Pakhom left his wife to look after the homestead, and started on his journey taking the tradesman
with him. On and on they went, until they had gone more than three hundred miles, and on the seventh
day they came to a place where the Bashkirs had pitched their tents. It was all just as the tradesman
had said.

As soon as they saw Pakhom, they came out of their tents and gathered round their visitor. An
interpreter was found and Pakhom told them that he had come about to have some land. The Bashkirs
seemed very glad; they took Pakhom and led him into one of the best tents, where they made him sit
on some down cushions placed on a carpet, while they sat around him. They gave him some tea and
kumiss and had a sheep killed, and gave him mutton to eat. Pakhom took presents out of his cart
and distributed them among the Bashkirs, and divided the tea amongst them. The Bashkirs were
delighted. They talked a great deal among themselves, and then told the interpreter to translate.

“They wish to tell you”, said the interpreter, “that they like you, and that it is our custom to do
all we can to please a guest and to repay him for his gifts. You have given us presents, now tell us
which of the things we possess please you best, that we may present them to you”.

“What pleases me best, here,” answered Pakhom, ‘is your land. Our land is crowded and the
soil is exhausted; but you have plenty of land and it is good land. I never saw the like of it.”

Pakhom immediately fetched the best dressing-gown and five pounds of tea, and offered these
to the chief. The chief accepted them, and seated himself in the place of honour. The Bashkirs at
once began telling him something. The chief listened for a while, then made a sign with his head for
them to be silent, and addressing himself to Pakhom, said in Russian : “Well, let it be so. Choose
whatever piece of land you like; we have plenty of it.”

“And what will be the price?” asked Pakhom.

“Our price is always the same: one thousand roubles a day.’

Pakhom did not understand.

“A day? What measure is that? How many acres would that be?”

“We do not know how to reckon it out,” said the chief. “We sell it by the day. As much as you
can go round on your feet in a day is yours, and the price is one thousand roubles a day.”

Pakhom was surprised.

“But in a day you can get round a large tract of land,” he said.

The chief laughed.

“Tt will all be yours!” said he. “But there is one condition; if you don’t return on the same day

to the spot whence you started, your money is lost.”

Page_Number 23 ended
/n
Page_Number 24 started
LITERATURE BOOK 25

Pakhom was delighted. It was decided to start early next morning. They gave Pakhom a feather-
bed to sleep on, and the Bashkirs dispersed for the night.

Pakhom lay on the feather-bed, but could not sleep. He kept thinking about the land. “What a
large tract I will mark off!” thought he. “I can easily do thirty-five miles in a day.”

In the morning, he got up, roused his man (who was sleeping in his cart), bade him harness; and
went to call the Bashkirs.

“Tt’s time to go to the steppe to measure the land,” he said.

The Bashkirs rose and assembled, and the chief came too. They ascended a hillock (called by
the Bashkirs a shikhan) and dismounting from their carts and their horses, gathered in one spot. The
chief came up to Pakhom and stretching out his arm towards the plain.

“See,” said he, “all this, as far as your eye can reach, is ours. You may have any part of it you
like.”

Pakhom’s eyes glistened : it was all virgin soil.

The chief took off his fox-fur cap, placed it on the ground and said : “This will be the mark.
Start from here, and return here again. All the land you go round shall be yours.”

Pakhom took out his money and put it on the cap. Then he took off his outer coat, remaining
in his sleeveless undercoat. He unfastened his girdle and tied it tight below his stomach, put a little
bag of bread into the breast of his coat, and tying a flask of water to his girdle, he drew up the tops
of his boots, took the spade from his man, and stood ready to start. He considered for some moments
which way he had better go-it was tempting everywhere.

“No matter,” he concluded, “I will go towards the rising sun.”

Pakhom started walking neither slowly nor quickly. After having gone a thousand yards he
stopped, dug a hole, and placed pieces of turf one on another to make it more visible. Then he went

on; and now that he had walked off his stiffness he quickened his pace. After a while he dug another
hole.

“T will go on for another three miles,” thought he, “and then turn to the left. This spot is so fine,
that it would be a pity to lose it. The further one goes, the better the land seems.”

He went straight on for a while and when he looked round, the hillock was scarcely visible and
the people on it looked like black ants, and he would just see something glistening there in the sun.

“Ah,” thought Pakhom, “I have gone far enough in this direction, it is time to turn. Besides I
am in a regular sweat, and very thirsty.”
He stopped, dug a large hole, and heaped up pieces of turf. Next he untied his flask, had a

drink and then turned sharply to the left. He went on and on; the grass was high, and it was very
hot.

Page_Number 24 ended
/n
Page_Number 25 started
%6 LITERATURE BOOK

Pakhom began to grow tired: he looked at the sun and saw that it was noon.
“Well,” he thought, “I must have rest.”

It had become terribly hot and he felt sleepy, still he went on and on, thinking : ‘An hour to
suffer, a lifetime to live.”

Late in the afternoon, Pakhom thought of turning back. So he hurriedly dug a hole, and turned
straight towards the hillock.

Pakhom went straight towards the hillock, but he now walked with difficulty. He was done up
with the heat, his bare feet were cut and bruised, and his legs began to fail. He longed to rest, but it
was impossible if he meant to get back before sunset. The sun waits for no man, and it was sinking
lower and lower.

He looked towards the hillock and at the sun.He was still far from his goal, and the sun was
already near the rim.

Pakhom walked on and on; it was very hard walking but he went quicker and quicker. He
pressed on, but was still far from the place. He began running, threw away his coat, his boots, his
flask and his cap, and kept only the spade which he used as a support.

“What shall I do?” he thought again, “I have grasped too much and ruined the whole affair. I
can’t get there before the sun sets.”

And this fear made him still more breathless. Pakhom went on running, his soaking shirt and
trousers stuck to him and his mouth was parched. His breast was working like a blacksmith’s bellows,
his heart was beating like hammer, and his legs were giving way as if they did not belong to him.
Pakhom was seized with terror lest he should die of the strain.

Though afraid of death, he could not stop. He gathered his last strength and ran on.

The sun was quite low, but he was also quite near his aim. Pakhom could already see the people
on the hillock waving their arms to hurry him up.

Pakhom looked at the sun, which had reached the earth: one side of it had already disappeared.
With all his remaining strength he rushed on, bending his body forward so that his legs could hardly
follow fast enough to keep him from falling. He took a long breath and ran up the hillock. It was still
light there. He reached the top and saw the cap. Before it sat the chief laughing and holding his sides.
Again Pakhom uttered a cry: his legs gave way beneath him, he fell forward and reached the cap
with his hands.

“Ah, that’s a fine fellow!” exclaimed the chief. “He has gained much land!”

Pakhom’s servant came running up and tried to raise him, but he saw that blood was flowing
from his mouth. Pakhom was dead!

The Bashkirs clicked their tongues to show their pity.

His servant picked up the spade and dug a grave long enough for Pakhom to lie in, and buried

him in it. Six feet from his head to his heels was all he needed.

Page_Number 25 ended
/n
Page_Number 26 started
LITERATURE BOOK 27

A. GLOSSARY

piqued : wounded in pride

sneeringly : with contempt

chatter : speak rapidly

grumbled : complained or protested

fallow land : land left uncultivated to allow it to regain fertility
prairie : level land overgrown with grass

scramble : struggle to get

tethered : fastened with a chain or rope

chuckle : low, quiet laugh

dozed off : fell asleep

glistened : shone brightly; sparkled

prostrate : (here) lying with front of body towards ground from utter tiredness
quivering : trembling or vibrating

parched : made dry by heat

. COMPREHENSION QUESTIONS

. What did the two women discuss? Were they related to each other?

2. What did one woman say in defence of rural life? What was the counter-argument?

3. Pakhom listened to the women’s chatter. He started brooding and reached a conclusion.

12.
13.

What was the conclusion?

. When the Devil heard Pakhom’s musings, what did he decide?
. The estate-owner on whose land Pakhom was tenant sold her land. Who bought the

land?

. How did Pakhom manage to put together the money for buying the land?
. Pakhom met a stranger one day. Who was this stranger? What information did he

give to Pakhom?

. A trader told Pakhom something about the land of Bashkirs. What was it?
. Who were the Bashkirs? How did Pakhom make friends with them?

10.
11.

Bashkirs wanted to repay Pakhom for his gifts. What did Pakhom want from them?

“Our price is always the same : One thousand roubles a day,’ the chief said. What did
he mean?

On what condition did the chief agree to sell land to Pakhom?
What is the moral of the story?

= L
A4YR76

oh oh ah 3h

Page_Number 26 ended
/n
Page_Number 27 started
RETURN TO AIR

Philippa A Pearce

The boy could swim well, but he had never tried duck-diving. His friend wanted him to learn it. What
happened when he tried to duck-dive the first time?

The ponds are very big, so that at one end people bathe and at the other end they fish.
Old men with bald heads sit on folding stools and fish with rods and lines, and little kids squeeze
through the railings and wade up into the water to fish with nets. But the water is much deeper
at our end of the pond, and that’s where we bathe. You are not allowed to bathe unless you can
swim, but I’ve always been able to swim. They say I could swim because I am fat, and I float.
Well, I don’t mind. They call me Sausage.

Only I don’t dive — not from the diving-board. I have to take my glasses off to go into
the water.
Then this summer they all wanted me to learn duck-diving. You are swimming on the
surface of water and suddenly you up — end yourself just like a duck and dive down deep into
the water and perhaps you swim about a bit underwater, and then come up again. I know ducks

can do this soon after they are born. It’s different for them.

So I was learning to duck-dive-to swim to the bottom of the pond and pick up a brick

they’d thrown in, and bring it up again. You practise this in case you have to rescue anyone
from drowning — gone down to the bottom. Of course, they are bigger and heavier than a brick.
I suppose you have to work on bricks and then gradually work up to people.

The swimming instructor said, “Sausage, I’m going to throw the brick.” It was a brick
with a bit of old white flannel round it, to make it show up underwater — “Sausage I’m going to
throw it — go after it and get it before it reaches the bottom and settles in the mud, or you’ll never
get it.”

He’d made everyone come out of the water to give me a chance and they were standing and
watching. I had removed my glasses, so I could only see the blurred figures. I could hear them talking
and laughing, but there wasn’t a sound in the water except the sound made by me. And then I saw
the brick go over my head and there was a splash as it went into the water. I thought I can’t do it —
my legs won’t move fast — they feel just flabby — it’s different for ducks. But while I was thinking this,
Id taken a deep breath, and then my head really went down and my legs went up in the air. I could
feel them there, just air around them, and then there was water around them, because I was going
down into the water, after all right down into the water; straight down ....

Page_Number 27 ended
/n
Page_Number 28 started
LITERATURE BOOK 29

At first my eyes were shut, I forced my eyelids up against the water to see. Because, although

I can’t see much without my glasses, I don’t believe anyone can see much underwater.

The water was like a thick green — brown lemonade, with some fish moving around. I could
see some whitish glimmer that must be the flannel round the brick, it was ahead of me, fading away
into the lower water, as I moved after it. Down we went, and the lemonade-—look quite went away,
and became just a dark blackish—brown, and I couldn’t see much. The brick looked different from
here, may be the flannel had come off. It had settled right into the mud. There was only one corner left
sticking up. I dug into the mud with my fingers and got hold of the thing, and then I didn’t think of
anything except getting up again with it into the air.

Touching the bottom like that had stirred up the mud, so I began to go up through a cloud of
it. I felt I would get lost. Perhaps I had swum underwater too far — perhaps I would be drifted towards
the place where people were fishing and get a fish-hook caught into the flesh of my cheek or perhaps

I just wasn’t going to find the top and the air again...

I was quite afraid, although I was going up quite quickly, and the water was already changing
from brown-black to green- brown and then to bright lemonade; I could also see the sun shining
through the water, I was getting near the surface. I was moving too slowly; I knew I would never

reach the air again in time.
Never the air again....

Then suddenly I was at the surface — I’d exploded back from the water into the air. For a
while I couldn’t think of anything; and I couldn’t do anything except let out the old breath I’d been
holding and take a couple of fresh, quick ones, and hold the brick.

Pond water was trickling down inside my nose and into my mouth, which I hate, but there was
air all around and above for me to breathe and to live. I might live to be hundred now, and keep a
sweet-shop of my own and walk on the Moon and breed mastiffs, and rescue someone from drowning

and be awarded a medal for it and be interviewed on TV.

And then I noticed they were shouting from the bank. They were cheering and shouting,
“Sausage, Sausage!” The instructor was saying with his hands round his mouth, “What on earth have

you got there, Sausage?”
So then I realised I had come almost at the other end of the pond.

I turned round and swam to the bank. They gave me my glasses to see what I had brought up
from the bottom. Because it wasn’t a brick; same size but a tin — an old tin - box with no paint left
on it and all brown-black slime from the bottom of the pond. It was as heavy as brick, because it

was full of mud - nothing but mud. It must have been there for years.

I’ve cleaned the tin up and kept on the mantelpiece at home with my coin-collection in it. I had
to duck-dive later for another brick, and I got it all right, without being frightened at all. I shall keep
the tin as long as I live, and I might live to be hundred.

Page_Number 28 ended
/n
Page_Number 29 started
LITERATURE BOOK

A. GLOSSARY

squeeze : to pass forcefully through a small space
sausage : ameat preparation made into a long round shape
diving : Jumping into the water with head or arms first
work on : do ajob/work

flannel : atype of soft woollen cloth

blurred : became less clear

splash : sound of water hitting something

flabby > fat

lemonade : a sweet drink made of lemon

glimmer : aweak, unsteady light

fading away: disappearing slowly

sticking up : pointing upwards

stirred : moved slightly

drifted : carried along by water/wind

exploded : came up fast with a loud noise

trickling : flowing down ina thin line

mastiff : a big dog with short hair

what on earth : an expression used to make a statement more forceful

slime : mud which gives foul smell

B. COMPREHENSION QUESTIONS

1. Why was the boy called ‘Sausage’ ?
2. Why did Sausage not like diving?

3. Choose the correct answer :
They all wanted me to learn duck-diving. Who were ‘they’?
(a) his friends
(b) his friends and the instructor
(c) his parents
. What is duck-diving? How is it taught ?
. What happened to Sausage when he tried duck-diving the first time?
. Why couldn’t Sausage see inside the water?
. Why did the water change colours? How did it change colours?

onan

. Was Sausage sure that he would not come out alive? Give examples to support your

answer.

Page_Number 29 ended
/n
Page_Number 30 started
LITERATURE BOOK 31

9. What did Sausage dig out? Did he know what he had caught hold of when he was inside
the water? Why?

10. Where did Sausage reach while swimming ?

11. What did Sausage do with the tin?
C. DISCUSSION

1. Swimming is a good exercise. Discuss.

2. Why is it not possible for every school to have a swimming pool? Discuss what amenities

should every school have?

D. SUGGESTED READING

1. ‘A High Dive’ by L. P. Hartley
2. ‘Out of the Blue by Bethany Hamilton; Reader’s Digest Sep. 2005

“muifae font, nfrarsat as
uje forest fesrar”’ uae |


Page_Number 30 ended
/n
Page_Number 31 started
32 LITERATURE BOOK

1. Bed Number 29

Glossary
depression : a state of feeling sad
minutely : detailedly
pleaded : requested
persuade > convince
regained : got back
masses : a large number
2. Half a Rupee Worth
Glossary
flourished : to be very successful
apprentice : one who is learning a trade under an expert
steadfastness : dedication/devotion
groaned : to complain about something
surrender : hand over
considerable : large in size/amount
exhausted : to consume entirely
contempt : a feeling of dislike
enraged : to make someone very angry
mutter : to complain in a quiet way
3. The Dying Detective
Glossary
listless : lacking energy or spirit
symptoms : a change in the body which indicates that a disease is present
dreadful : very bad or unpleasant
4. How Much Land does a Man Need
Glossary
inevitable : sure to happen
boasting : self praising
supper : light evening meal served before dinner
interpreter : someone who mediates between speakers of different languages
dispersed : move away from each other

ruined : caused failure

Page_Number 31 ended
