
Page_Number 0 started
Let’s BEGIN

1. You have read about Lencho in ‘A Letter to God’, First Flight, 7-7
textbook in English for Class X. How has the story of Lencho SS
moved you? What do you think about Lencho’s faith in God
and his attitude towards the officials in the post office? Do
you think he is right in asking God for support and then
blaming the people at the post office? Discuss his actions
with your friends. Why does he do so?

2. The summary of the story of Lencho is given below. The
sequence of the story is jumbled up.
Read the story again and rearrange the jumbled sentences
to make a coherent story.

Write the correct
order in numbers in Jumbled sentences
the column below

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 1 27-Jun-2019 04:21:14 PM

Page_Number 0 ended
/n
Page_Number 1 started
He wrote a letter to God asking for a hundred pesos
to sow his field again and to survive until the next
crop came up.

After some days, Lencho went to the post office to
receive the money as the postmaster watched him.

He immediately went to the counter and asked for
a pen and paper, wrote a few lines and posted the
letter.

Lencho, his wife, and their children lived in a lonely
house in a valley.

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
4,
4

When the postmaster opened the letter, it said “Oh!
Thanks for sending the money. But I have received
only seventy pesos. Next time you please send the
money directly to me. The people at the post office
are a bunch of crooks. They have taken the thirty

He opened the letter and was happy to find the
money. He counted and found it was only seventy

The postmaster collected about 70 pesos from his
colleagues and sent it to Lencho.

Create a graphic description based on the given summary of
‘A Letter to God’.

Worps AND Expressions 2 — CLass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 2 27-Jun-2019 04:21:15 PM

Page_Number 1 ended
/n
Page_Number 2 started
Unit-1.indd 3

Reprint 2024-25

Unrr 1 — A Letrer To Gop

27-Jun-2019 04:21:15 PM

Page_Number 2 ended
/n
Page_Number 3 started
READING COMPREHENSION
Text I

Given below is a story of the tailor who has been known for his
skills in cheating and stealing. Read in groups of four or in pairs.
You may discuss the events and incidences of the story with
your friends and write them in a sequential manner.

There was a tailor who was known for beating others in the art of
being light-fingered and thievery. A trader swore that even with
a hundred attempts, the tailor would not be able to take a coil of
thread from him without his knowledge.

The trader was told that many others, more intelligent than
cordiality him, had been beaten by the tailor. They said he should not
hamper imagine himself so great, for his ego would only give him worse

. troubles in competition with the tailor. Still, the trader became
SUIS OAS more competitive and made a wager that the tailor would not be
wagered able to rob him of anything.

He wagered an Arab horse with those who taunted him. If
the tailor failed to steal, then they would have to give him a
horse instead. That night, the trader lay awake troubled by the
situation and could not sleep a wink.

In the morning, he put a piece of satin cloth under his arm
and went to the bazaar and entered the shop and saluted the
cunning rogue warmly. The tailor sprang up from his seat and
welcomed the trader, inquiring about his health with cordiality
exceeding even that of the trader, planting in his heart great
feelings of affection for him. When the trader heard these songs
of sweetness from the tailor, he flung down the piece of silk
saying, “Cut this into a coat for me and make it wide below my
navel so as not to hamper my legs and tight about it to show off
my figure.”

fie) The tailor answered, “O! kindly man, I will do you a hundred

beguiling

TeX

A services,” and accepted the order. He measured the satin and

f ve \ inspected the working surface and all the time chatted away

; a \ to the trader in idle gossip, about other amirs and of bounties

] and gifts he had received from them, and about misers and their

| ° mean ways, and made the trader laugh with hysterics. During

[oe . this beguiling talk, he was snipping away with his scissors
rapidly, cutting as fast as his lips moved.

‘ 4 Worbs AND Expressions 2 — Cass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 4 27-Jun-2019 04:21:15 PM

Page_Number 3 ended
/n
Page_Number 4 started
Unit-1.indd 5

The trader was laughing, the tailor was cutting, the trader
closed his eyes in joy, the tailor cut extra pieces, tucking them
under his thighs, hidden away from all but God. From his delight
at the tailor’s tales, the trader’s former boast went out of his
mind. What satinP What boast? What wager? The trader was
drunk on the jokes told by the tailor.

Then the tailor told such an incredible story that the trader
fell over on his back with laughter. The tailor swiftly stitched a
swatch of the satin to the hem of his underpants while the trader
was paying no attention at all, greedily sucking with every guffaw
at the jests the tailor told. The tailor continued to tell funnier and
funnier tales and jokes until the trader was completely within
his power.

With his eyes shut and his reason vanished, the bewildered
and boastful trader was drunk with joy. And the tailor continued
to cut, filching yet more of the beautiful cloth, with nothing to
stop him now. And yet the trader begged for more.

You who becomes the slave of the jest, no story is more

laughable than you yourself, think on this at the edge of

your grave. How long will you listen to the lies of this world
that leave your mind and spirit unhinged? The Universal

Tailor will cut and stitch the hems of a hundred travellers,

silly as children.

Eventually the tailor became bored with the whole story and
told the trader that he better leave before another tale was told,
“For if I tell another one, the coat will be too tight for you, and
you will stop laughing and weep tears of blood.”

Rumi (Abridged)

Did you enjoy the story of ‘The Trader and the Tailor’?
The story is summarised below. Read the story again
with your friend and complete the paragraph using short
sentences with the given hints.

Once there was a tailor who was known for

(cheat and thievery). He could

cheat anyone with his cunning way of deceiving people. A
trader challenged that the tailor would not be able to cheat
him. He (go) to the tailor with

Loox Up

G
U NDERSTAND

AND

filching
incredible
swatch

unhinged

Unir 1 — A Letrer To Gop

Reprint 2024-25

01-Jul-2019 12:53:56 PM

Page_Number 4 ended
/n
Page_Number 5 started
(satin). The tailor

(welcome). The trader

(please) by the tailor’s praise. He told the tailor to make

a coat for him. The tailor (praise) the trader

(maximum). The trader (joy).

The tailor (recount) funny tales and the trader

forgot (bet). The tailor started snipping
and

hide). Eyes of the trader

(tears and joy) and yet the trader kept on asking for
(stories). At last, the tailor told the trader

that (tight) and

(weep-blood).

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
4,
4

( Vocanuuany)

1. In this story you have come across a word “light-fingered”
which means inclined to steal things. Some such words are
given below. Use appropriate words and fill in the blanks.

light-headed, light year, light-hearted, light sleeper,
light-duty

(a) The is a unit of distance used to

measure distance in space.

(b) The farmer bought a truck to
transport their produce, as it uses less diesel.

(c) We had a fairly discussion with

our colleagues.

(d) Rita felt dizzy and after skydiving.

(e) Heisa ,a slightest noise wakes him.

Worbs AND Expressions 2 — Cass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 6 27-Jun-2019 04:21:16 PM

Page_Number 5 ended
/n
Page_Number 6 started
1. You have come across Relative Clauses in the lesson ‘A Letter
to God’. Read about the relative clauses again. Complete
the sentences given below in the table by adding the most
suitable clause from the box and make it a relative clause.
The first one has been done for you.

contains meaning of words need to fill in the
application

stitches clothes

tell lies is a crook

won the best actor award this help themselves
year won the nobel prize
hit a century believe in hard work

is faithful

(a) A tailor is a person who stitches clothes.

(b) A dictionary is a book

(c) The book is about a scientist

(d) What is the name of the player

(e) I don’t like people

(f) What is the name of the actor

(g) Students
should meet the principal in her office.

(h) Friends of the trader thought the tailor
and can cheat anyone.

(i) Lencho thought God would help
him.
(j) Those will succeed.

(k) God helps those

Unir 1 — A Letrer To Gop 7 ‘

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 7 02-Jul-2019 03:56:01 PM

Page_Number 6 ended
/n
Page_Number 7 started
 Eprrine

1. Suppose Lencho gets a hundred pesos in his envelope. He
writes a letter to God expressing his gratitude. However, he
has missed a word in each line. Help him with those words
so that his letter is complete.

Dear God!
Thank for Thank you for

(a) sending a hundred pesos help.
(b) I am very for this kind gesture.

(c) You were my only and your

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
4,
4

(d) help has my faith in you.

(e) This money will help me until the crop

(f) and I promise to hard in the future.

Sincerely yours,
Lencho

1. Here isan interesting story. The story has been told in two
ways. Story A has all the odd sentences (1,3,5,...) and story B
has the even sentences (2,4,6,...). Working in pairs, one of you
take up Story A and the other take up Story B. The person
with Story A will.read out the first sentence and the partner
(person with story B) will write in the space provided. Then the
person with Story B will read sentence two and the partner
will write in the space for sentence two. Likewise complete the
whole story. Once the story is completed, both of you will read
out to each other to check whether you have listened carefully
to your partner and written the complete story.

Story A The Race Story B The Race

1. Every evening the animals of the 1.

Machlipatti used to sit under

the banyan tree.

Worbs AND Expressions 2 — Cass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 8 27-Jun-2019 04:21:16 PM

Page_Number 7 ended
/n
Page_Number 8 started
2. 2. One day Kho-Kho, the rabbit,

was feeling bored.

3. He said, “Let’s run a race!” “Who 3.

will run a race with you?

4. 4. No one can run faster than you,”

said Bhalu, the bear, eating a

mango.
5. Choo-Choo, the rat, shouted, 5.
“No, he’s not the fastest runner.
6. 6. I can run faster than him.”
7. Everyone laughed at him. 7.
8. 8. Then it was decided to have
a race between Kho-Kho and
Choo-Choo.
9. The starting point was the 9.
peepul tree and the finishing
point was the neem tree.
10. 10. Coocku, the cock, crowed to

start the race.

11. Kho-Kho and Choo-Choo started } 11.

running.

Unir 1 — A Letrer To Gop

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 9 27-Jun-2019 04:21:16 PM

Page_Number 8 ended
/n
Page_Number 9 started
12. 12. After running half the distance,
Kho-Kho looked back but Choo-
Choo was nowhere to be seen.

13. “He must be far behind.” 13.

14. 14. When he was near the finishing

point, Choo-Choo jumped over
Kho-Kho’s shoulder and touched
the neem tree first.

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
4,
4

15. He shouted, “I’ve won the race! | 15.

”

I’ve won the race

16. 16. Everyone cheered for Choo-Choo.

SPEAKING

1. Lencho, the main character in the story, is a farmer.

He supports his family through farming. The conflict in
the story happens when a hailstorm strikes the field and
destroys his farm. All the hard work, for nothing! The entire
land is wrecked by catastrophe. There is no one who can
help. Lencho’s complete faith in God is amazing during the
calamity.

So, one type of conflict dominating in the story is man
versus nature. Discuss with your partner the natural calamities
that play havoc in the lives of people. Collect photographs and
make a visual presentation to share in the class.

2. Try writing a small poem on the topic man versus nature.
Read aloud the poem with the required stress and intonation.
Given below is a poem written by Norman Littleford, which
may help you think and compose.

10 Worps AND Expressions 2 — CLass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 10 27-Jun-2019 04:21:16 PM

Page_Number 9 ended
/n
Page_Number 10 started
The heavens roared with thunder
as lightning filled the skies
was this God getting angry

or Nature’s big surprise.

Is Mother Nature telling us
the best way that she can
to stop the interference
and abuse she gets from man.
We marvel at her beauty
each time we look around
then dig up all her treasures
from their natural burial ground.
We forget that Nature gives us
all that keeps us living

we take it all and still want more
but never think of giving.

We build across the countryside

progressing every day

but Mother Nature can’t progress

for man is in the way.

Norman Littleford

— WritIne

1. The tailor here is a cheat, but Lencho in the story, ‘A Letter
to God’, is naive and simple. He has immense faith in God.
How do you distinguish between Lencho and the tailor? What
makes them different? Working in pairs, list the actions and

qualities of Lencho and the tailor and draw their character
sketches.

Unir 1 — A Letrer To Gop

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 11 02-Jul-2019 11:58:27 AM

Page_Number 10 ended
/n
Page_Number 11 started
Lencho lost all his crops. He is helpless. Prays to
God.

Does he harm anyone by
his action?

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
4,
4

What is your judgement of
him?

Now, write the character sketch of Lencho and the tailor.

Lencho The tailor

Worps AND Expressions 2 — CLass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 12 01-Jul-2019 12:54:23 PM

Page_Number 11 ended
/n
Page_Number 12 started
Unit-1.indd 13.

2. Writing a portrait or description of a person

Read the following description about two persons, Raavi and

Mohini.

A portrait or a picture of a
handsome young man in full
sleeves shirt.

Raavi is an engineer in a
manufacturing firm.

He likes to make, fix, and
repair things.

He loves to watch television
and goes to the movies thrice
a month.

He i congenial and
supportive.

He does not like to play,
but goes for a morning walk
everyday.

Mohini

A portrait or a picture of a
middle aged lady who is a
singer.

She studied music and
became a playback singer.

She likes to be with people
and participates in social
functions.

She loves music and reading
books.

She is firm and a lady witha
purpose.

She does not get time to
exercise.

Now, write a description of any one of the above based on the
details given. You may follow the process approach to writing.
First, you read the given information in the box and make a list
of describable (adjectives) points used for each person, in your
own words. Secondly, take the help of these points to develop an
outline in sentence form. Thirdly, use the outline and prepare
the first draft of the description of the person and then edit the
draft. Prepare the final copy after making all changes. The table

Unir 1 — A Letrer To Gop

Reprint 2024-25

27-Jun-2019 04:21:17 PM

Page_Number 12 ended
/n
Page_Number 13 started
below gives you ideas on how the Process Approach is helpful
for improving your writing.

Outlining Create an outline of your writing—
which ideas will go first, how will they
be supported by evidence, will there be a
picture, etc.

Revising Revise the first draft, improve it. Add or
delete ideas and improve the language.

Final draft Write the final draft now.

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
4,
4

Raavi / Mohini

Worps AND Expressions 2 — CLass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 14 27-Jun-2019 04:21:17 PM

Page_Number 13 ended
/n
Page_Number 14 started
— Prosecr ]

1. You may have come across some people in your
neighbourhood who might have inspired you with their
actions. Talk to them about—

¢ their childhood, their education, job, their likes and
dislikes

¢ their contribution to the enrichment of their village or
town, job, country, etc.

¢ their interesting features and characteristics

Request for their pictures. Based on the collected information,
write their portraits and present it to the class. You may
read on ‘How to do project work?’ given below.

How to do project work in the English
language classroom?

In addition to the textbook activities, project work could be
used as an effective strategy to promote collaborative ways of
language learning where we work together in groups to do an
activity. We collect information, ideas; observe the language
being used; use language in real life situations; exchange
views and debate on ideas; write the ideas into a report; edit
our writing and produce the report in a suitable form. This
helps in constructing ideas and analysing critical judgments
of the peers to arrive at a decision or conclusion.

It would be of much benefit to learners, if projects planned
are of an interdisciplinary nature.

Designing and managing projects

There are many ways students can be initiated to carry out
projects.

e Read books, newspapers, listen to the radio, watch
TV, consult websites and encyclopedia, talk to people,
observe events and proceedings, interview people,
record audio/ video, collect pictures and illustrations,
interpret them, and report.

¢ Write field notes to remember and organise the data
collected.

Unrr 1-ALetrerto Gop 15

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 15 27-Jun-2019 04:21:17 PM

Page_Number 14 ended
/n
Page_Number 15 started
¢ Bring your own ideas to the class and have a class
discussion.

¢ Use language meaningfully and precisely. If the meaning
of learning is ‘meaning making’, the purpose is achieved
fully while doing projects.

¢ Learners should do the projects in group independently.

They should not ask their parents to do these or buy
readymade products available in the market.

¢ They may seek information or some help from parents
or elders.

Planning, writing the draft and editing

XTRAPOLATION

Pl
4,
4

Having collected the required data, information and ideas,
plan and organise the data and interpret them to write the
draft. It could be posters, a script of a play (enact and direct
a play), songs, essays, etc. Editing is an important part
of writing the report. Students should be made aware of
process approach involved in writing a good piece of work.
Then present it to the whole class or to the school during the
assembly or on special occasions (in case of play, songs, etc.).

‘ 16 Worbs AND Expressions 2 — Cass X

Reprint 2024-25

Unit-1.indd 16 27-Jun-2019 04:21:17 PM

Page_Number 15 ended
