
Page_Number 0 started
MssUyD 3JINgzID5

LMA

Ais

SCIENCE

Page_Number 0 ended
/n
Page_Number 1 started
“Facts are not science — as the dictionary is not literature.”
Martin H. Fischer

CHAPTER ‘I
' Chemical Reactions
i= and Equations

onsider the following situations of daily life and think what happens
when -

milk is left at room temperature during summers.

an iron tawa/pan/nail is left exposed to humid atmosphere.
grapes get fermented.

food is cooked.

food gets digested in our body.

we respire.

In all the above situations, the nature and the identity of the initial
substance have somewhat changed. We have already learnt about physical
and chemical changes of matter in our previous classes. Whenever a chemical
change occurs, we can say that a chemical reaction has taken place.

You may perhaps be wondering as to what is actually meant by a
chemical reaction. How do we come to know that a chemical reaction
has taken place? Let us perform some activities to find the answer to
these questions.

Activity 1.1

CAUTION: This Activity needs
the teacher’s assistance. It
would be better if students
wear eye protection.
Clean a magnesium ribbon
about 2 cm long by rubbing
it with sandpaper.
Hold it with a pair of tongs.
Burn it using a spirit lamp or
burner and collect the ash so
formed in a watch-glass as
shown in Fig. 1.1. Burn the
magnesium ribbon keeping it
as far as possible from your
eyes. Figure 1.1
What do you observe? Burning of a magnesium ribbon in air and collection of magnesium
oxide in a watch-glass

Watch-glass

Magnesium
oxide


Page_Number 1 ended
/n
Page_Number 2 started
Activity 1.2

Take lead nitrate
solution in a test
tube.

Add potassium
iodide solution
to this.

What do you
observe?

Figure 1.2

Formation of hydrogen
gas by the action of
dilute sulphuric acid on
zinc

You must have observed that magnesium ribbon burns with a
dazzling white flame and changes into a white powder. This powder is
magnesium oxide. It is formed due to the reaction between magnesium
and oxygen present in the air.

Activity 1.3

Take a few zinc granules in a conical flask or a test tube.
Add dilute hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid to this
(Fig. 1.2).

CAUTION: Handle the acid with care.

Do you observe anything happening around the zinc
granules?

Touch the conical flask or test tube. Is there any change in
its temperature?

From the above three activities, we can say that any of
the following observations helps us to determine whether

Cork a chemical reaction has taken place -

change in state

change in colour
evolution ofa gas
change in temperature.

Glass tube

As we observe the changes around us, we can see
that there is a large variety of chemical reactions taking
place around us. We will study about the various types
of chemical reactions and their symbolic representation
Dilute sulphuric acid jn this Chapter.

Zine granules

1.1 CHEMICAL EQUATIONS

Activity 1.1 can be described as — when a magnesium ribbon is burnt in
oxygen, it gets converted to magnesium oxide. This description of a
chemical reaction in a sentence form is quite long. It can be written ina
shorter form. The simplest way to do this is to write it in the form ofa
word-equation.

The word-equation for the above reaction would be —

Conical flask

Magnesium + Oxygen — Magnesium oxide (1.1)
(Reactants) (Product)

The substances that undergo chemical change in the reaction (1.1),
magnesium and oxygen, are the reactants. The new substance,
magnesium oxide, formed during the reaction, is the product.

A word-equation shows change of reactants to products through an
arrow placed between them. The reactants are written on the left-hand
side (LHS) with a plus sign (+) between them. Similarly, products are
written on the right-hand side (RHS) with a plus sign (+) between them.
The arrowhead points towards the products, and shows the direction of
the reaction.

Science

Page_Number 2 ended
/n
Page_Number 3 started
1.1.1 Writing a Chemical Equation

Is there any other shorter way for representing chemical equations?
Chemical equations can be made more concise and useful if we use
chemical formulae instead of words. A chemical equation represents a
chemical reaction. If you recall formulae of magnesium, oxygen and
magnesium oxide, the above word-equation can be written as —

Mg+0, — MgO (1.2)

Count and compare the number of atoms of each element on the
LHS and RHS of the arrow. Is the number of atoms of each element the
same on both the sides? If not, then the equation is unbalanced because
the mass is not the same on both sides of the equation. Such a chemical
equation is a skeletal chemical equation for a reaction. Equation (1.2) is
a skeletal chemical equation for the burning of magnesium in air.

1.1.2 Balanced Chemical Equations

Recall the law of conservation of mass that you studied in Class LX; mass
can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. That is, the
total mass of the elements present in the products of a chemical reaction
has to be equal to the total mass of the elements present in the reactants.

In other words, the number of atoms of each element remains the
same, before and after a chemical reaction. Hence, we need to balance a
skeletal chemical equation. Is the chemical Eq. (1.2) balanced? Let us
learn about balancing a chemical equation step by step.

The word-equation for Activity 1.3 may be represented as —

Zinc + Sulphuric acid — Zinc sulphate + Hydrogen

The above word-equation may be represented by the following
chemical equation —

Zn + H,SO, > ZnSO, + H, (1.3)

Let us examine the number of atoms of different elements on both
sides of the arrow.

Number of atoms in Number of atoms
reactants (LHS) in products (RHS)
1 1

N
oom
Re ND
BeN

As the number of atoms of each element is the same on both sides of
the arrow, Eq. (1.3) is a balanced chemical equation.

Let us try to balance the following chemical equation —
Fe + H,O > Fe,O, + H, (1.4)

Chemical Reactions and Equations

Page_Number 3 ended
/n
Page_Number 4 started
Step I: To balance a chemical equation, first draw boxes around each
formula. Do not change anything inside the boxes while balancing the
equation.

[Fe] + [H,9] > [Fe,0,] + [H]] (1.5)

Step II: List the number of atoms of different elements present in the
unbalanced equation (1.5).

Element Number of atoms Number of atoms
in reactants (LHS) in products (RHS)

Fe 1 3
H 2 2
[e) 1 4

Step III: It is often convenient to start balancing with the compound
that contains the maximum number of atoms. It may be a reactant ora
product. In that compound, select the element which has the maximum
number of atoms. Using these criteria, we select Fe,O, and the element
oxygen in it. There are four oxygen atoms on the RHS and only one on
the LHS.

To balance the oxygen atoms —

Atoms of In reactants In products
oxygen

(i) Initial 1 (in H,O) 4 (in Fe,O,)
(ii) To balance 1x4 4

To equalise the number of atoms, it must be remembered that we
cannot alter the formulae of the compounds or elements involved in the
reactions. For example, to balance oxygen atoms we can put coefficient
‘4’ as 4H,O and not H,0, or (H,O),. Now the partly balanced equation
becomes —

(1.6)
[Fe] * 4{H,0] ~ [Fe,0,] * [Ha] (partly balanced equation)

Step IV: Fe and H atoms are still not balanced. Pick any of these elements
to proceed further. Let us balance hydrogen atoms in the partly balanced
equation.

To equalise the number of H atoms, make the number of molecules
of hydrogen as four on the RHS.

Atoms of In reactants In products
hydrogen

(i) Initial 8 (in 4 HO) 2 (in H,)
(ii) To balance 8 2x4

The equation would be -

(1.7)
+ 4 > + fH, | (partly balanced equation)

Science

Page_Number 4 ended
/n
Page_Number 5 started
Step V: Examine the above equation and pick up the third element which
is not balanced. You find that only one element is left to be balanced,
that is, iron.

Atoms of In reactants
iron

(i) Initial 1 (in Fe) 3 (in Fe,O,)
(ii) To balance 1x3 3

To equalise Fe, we take three atoms of Fe on the LHS.

3 (1.8)

2

Fe]+ 4 [H,0] [Feo] + 4 [A

Step VI: Finally, to check the correctness of the balanced equation, we
count atoms of each element on both sides of the equation.
(1.9)

3Fe + 4H,O0 > Fe,O, + 4H, (balanced equation)

The numbers of atoms of elements on both sides of Eq. (1.9) are
equal. This equation is now balanced. This method of balancing chemical
equations is called hit-and-trial method as we make trials to balance
the equation by using the smallest whole number coefficient.

Step VII: Writing Symbols of Physical States Carefully examine
the above balanced Eq. (1.9). Does this equation tell us anything about
the physical state of each reactant and product? No information has
been given in this equation about their physical states.

To make a chemical equation more informative, the physical states
of the reactants and products are mentioned along with their chemical
formulae. The gaseous, liquid, aqueous and solid states of reactants
and products are represented by the notations (g), (J), (aq) and (s),
respectively. The word aqueous (aq) is written ifthe reactant or product
is present as a solution in water.

The balanced Eq. (1.9) becomes

3Fe(s) + 4H,O(g) > Fe,O,(s) + 4H,(g) (1.10)

Note that the symbol (g) is used with H,O to indicate that in this
reaction water is used in the form of steam.

Usually physical states are not included in a chemical equation unless
it is necessary to specify them.

Sometimes the reaction conditions, such as temperature, pressure,
catalyst, etc., for the reaction are indicated above and/or below the arrow
in the equation. For example —

COlg) + 2H, (g) 2402", cH OHW) (1.11)
6CO, faq) + 6H,O0) —-oemieht _, C,H,,Oglaq) +60, (aq) (1.1)

Chlorophyll
(Glucose)

Using these steps, can you balance Eq. (1.2) given in the text earlier?

Chemical Reactions and Equations

Page_Number 5 ended
/n
Page_Number 6 started
Q U ES TION §

Why should a magnesium ribbon be cleaned before burning in air?

Write the balanced equation for the following chemical reactions.

(i) Hydrogen + Chlorine - Hydrogen chloride

(ii) Barium chloride + Aluminium sulphate — Barium sulphate +

Aluminium chloride

(iii) Sodium + Water — Sodium hydroxide + Hydrogen

Write a balanced chemical equation with state symbols for the
following reactions.

(i) Solutions of barium chloride and sodium sulphate in water react
to give insoluble barium sulphate and the solution of sodium

chloride.

(ii) Sodium hydroxide solution (in water) reacts with hydrochloric
acid solution (in water) to produce sodium chloride solution and

water.

Figure 1.3

Formation of slaked
lime by the reaction of
calcium oxide with

water

1.2 TYPES OF CHEMICAL REACTIONS

We have learnt in Class LX that during a chemical reaction atoms of one
element do not change into those of another element. Nor do atoms
disappear from the mixture or appear from elsewhere. Actually, chemical
reactions involve the breaking and making of bonds between atoms to
produce new substances. You will study about types of bonds formed
between atoms in Chapters 3 and 4.

1.2.1 Combination Reaction

beaker Activity 1.4
Take a small amount of calcium oxide
or quick lime in a beaker.
Water Slowly add water to this.
Touch the beaker as shown in Fig. 1.3.

i 2
Calcium oxide Do you feel any change in temperature?

Calcium oxide reacts vigorously with water to produce slaked lime
(calcium hydroxide) releasing a large amount of heat.

CaO(s) + H,O(1) — Ca(OH),(aq) (1.13)
(Quick lime) (Slaked lime)

In this reaction, calcium oxide and water combine to form a single
product, calcium hydroxide. Such a reaction in which a single product
is formed from two or more reactants is known as a combination reaction.

Science

Page_Number 6 ended
/n
Page_Number 7 started
A solution of slaked lime produced by the reaction 1.13 is used for white washing
walls. Calcium hydroxide reacts slowly with the carbon dioxide in air to form a thin
layer of calcium carbonate on the walls. Calcium carbonate is formed after two to

three days of white washing and gives a shiny finish to the walls. It is interesting to
note that the chemical formula for marble is also CaCO,.

Ca(OH),aq + CO,(g) > CaCO,s) +H,00) (1.14)

(Calcium (Calcium

Do You Know?

hydroxide) carbonate)

Let us discuss some more examples of combination reactions.
(i) Burning of coal

C(s) + 0,(g) > CO,{g) (1.15)
(ii) Formation of water from H,(g) and O,(g)
2H,(g) + O,(g) > 2H,O()) (1.16)

In simple language we can say that when two or more substances
(elements or compounds) combine to form a single product, the reactions
are called combination reactions.

In Activity 1.4, we also observed that a large amount of heat is evolved.
This makes the reaction mixture warm. Reactions in which heat is
released along with the formation of products are called exothermic
chemical reactions.

Other examples of exothermic reactions are -

(i) Burning of natural gas

CH,(g) + 20, (g) > CO, (g) + 2H,0 (g) (1.17)
(ii) Do you know that respiration is an exothermic process?

We all know that we need energy to stay alive. We get this energy
from the food we eat. During digestion, food is broken down into simpler
substances. For example, rice, potatoes and bread contain
carbohydrates. These carbohydrates are broken down to form glucose.
This glucose combines with oxygen in the cells of our body and provides
energy. The special name of this reaction is respiration, the process of
which you will study in Chapter 6.

C,H,,,0,(aq) + 60,(aq) > 6CO, (aq) + 6H,O(]) + energy (1.18)

1276
(Glucose)

(iii) The decomposition of vegetable matter into compost is also an
example of an exothermic reaction.
Identify the type of the reaction taking place in Activity 1.1, where
heat is given out along with the formation of a single product.

Chemical Reactions and Equations 7

Page_Number 7 ended
/n
Page_Number 8 started
Wafting gas gently
towards nose

Do not point
the mouth of
boiling tube

at your neighbours
or yourself

Burner

Figure 1.4

Correct way of heating
the boiling tube
containing crystals

of ferrous sulphate
and of smelling the
odour

Test

1.2.2 Decomposition Reaction

Activity 1.5

Take about 2 g ferrous sulphate crystals
in a dry boiling tube.
Note the colour of the ferrous sulphate

Boiling tube crystals.
F Heat the boiling tube over the flame of
‘errous sulphate
crystals a burner or spirit lamp as shown in
Fig. 1.4.
Observe the colour of the crystals after
heating.

Have you noticed that the green colour of the ferrous sulphate crystals
has changed? You can also smell the characteristic odour of burning
sulphur.

2FeSO,(s) __Heat_, Fe,O,(s) + SO,(g) + SO,(2) (1.19)
(Ferrous sulphate) (Ferric oxide)

In this reaction you can observe that a single reactant breaks down
to give simpler products. This is a decomposition reaction. Ferrous
sulphate crystals (FeSO, 7H,O) lose water when heated and the colour
of the crystals changes. It then decomposes to ferric oxide (Fe,O,),
sulphur dioxide (SO,) and sulphur trioxide (SO,). Ferric oxide is a solid,
while SO, and SO, are gases.

Decomposition of calcium carbonate to calcium oxide and carbon
dioxide on heating is an important decomposition reaction used in
various industries. Calcium oxide is called lime or quick lime. It has
many uses — one is in the manufacture of cement. When a decomposition
reaction is carried out by heating, it is called thermal decomposition.

CaCO,(s) _Heat_, CaO(s) + CO,(g) (1.20)
(Limestone) (Quick lime)

Another example of a thermal decomposition reaction is given

tube holder 41 Activity 1.6.

Bolling tube Activity 1.6

Lead nitrate

Take about 2 g lead nitrate powder in a boiling
tube.

Burner = Hold the boiling tube with a pair of tongs and

Figure 1.5

heat it over a flame, as shown in Fig. 1.5.
= What do you observe? Note down the change,
if any.

You will observe the emission of brown fumes.

Heating of lead nitrate and These fumes are of nitrogen dioxide (NO,). The

emission of nitrogen dioxide

reaction that takes place is —

Science

Page_Number 8 ended
/n
Page_Number 9 started
2Pb(NO,),(s) __Heat_, 2PbO(s) + ANO,(g) + O,(g)
(Lead nitrate) (Lead oxide) (Nitrogen

Let us perform some more decomposition reactions as given in

dioxide)

Activities 1.7 and 1.8.

Activity 1.7

= Take a plastic mug. Drill two holes at its

base and fit rubber stoppers in these holes.
Insert carbon electrodes in these rubber
stoppers as shown in Fig. 1.6.

= Connect these electrodes to a 6 volt

battery.

= Fill the mug with water such that the

electrodes are immersed. Add a few drops
of dilute sulphuric acid to the water.

= Take two test tubes filled with water and

invert them over the two carbon electrodes.

= Switch on the current and leave the

apparatus undisturbed for some time.

= You will observe the formation of bubbles
at both the electrodes. These bubbles displace water in the

test tubes.

(Oxygen)

Oxygen.

Test tube

Graphite rod

Anode

Switch

Is the volume of the gas collected the same in both the test tubes?
Once the test tubes are filled with the respective gases, remove

them carefully.

Test these gases one by one by bringing a burning candle close

to the mouth of the test tubes.

CAUTION: This step must be performed carefully by the teacher.

What happens in cach case?
Which gas is present in each test tube?

Activity 1.8

Take about 2 g silver chloride in a china dish.

= What is its colour?

You will see that white silver chloride turns grey in sunlight. This is
due to the decomposition of silver chloride into silver and chlorine by

light.

Place this china dish in sunlight for some time

(Fig. 1.7).

(1.21)

Plastic mug

Hydrogen

Water

Water

Rubber stopper

Cathode

Figure 1.6
Electrolysis of water

Observe the colour of the silver chloride after some

time.

2AgC\(s) _ Sunlight _, 2ag(s) + CL(g)

Chemical Reactions and Equations

(1.22)

China dish
Silver chloride

Figure 1.7

Silver chloride turns grey
in sunlight to form silver
metal

Page_Number 9 ended
/n
Page_Number 10 started
Silver bromide also behaves in the same way.

2AgBr(s)_ Sunlight _, 2Ag{s) + Br,(g) (1.23)

The above reactions are used in black and white photography.
What form of energy is causing these decomposition reactions?

We have seen that the decomposition reactions require energy either
in the form of heat, light or electricity for breaking down the reactants.
Reactions in which energy is absorbed are known as endothermic
reactions.

Carry out the following Activity

Take about 2 g barium hydroxide in a test tube. Add 1 g of ammonium chloride and mix
with the help ofa glass rod. Touch the bottom of the test tube with your palm. What do you
feel? Is this an exothermic or endothermic reaction?

Q UES TION §S

A solution of a substance ‘X’ is used for white washing.
(i) Name the substance ‘X’ and write its formula.

(ii) Write the reaction of the substance ‘X’ named in (i) above with
water,

Why is the amount of gas collected in one of the test tubes in Activity
1.7 double of the amount collected in the other? Name this gas.

1.2.3 Displacement Reaction

Stand Activity 1.9

= Take three iron nails and clean them by
Test tube rubbing with sand paper.
= Take two test tubes marked as (A) and
(B). In each test tube, take about 10 mL
copper sulphate solution.
Copper sulphate = Tie two iron nails with a thread and
solution immerse them carefully in the copper
sulphate solution in test tube B for
Iron nail about 20 minutes [Fig. 1.8 (a)]. Keep one
iron nail aside for comparison.
= After 20 minutes, take out the iron nails
from the copper sulphate solution.
= Compare the intensity of the blue colour
of copper sulphate solutions in test tubes
(A) and (B), [Fig. 1.8 (b)].
(a) = Also, compare the colour of the iron nails
Figure 1.8 dipped in the copper sulphate solution
(a) Iron nails dipped in copper sulphate solution with the one kept aside [Fig. 1.8 (b)].

‘Thread

10 Science

Page_Number 10 ended
/n
Page_Number 11 started
Copper Test tube

Tron nail Tron nail taken sulphate

out from copper solution Test tube

sulphate (test tube A) stand

solution .
Reaction
mixture
(test tube B)

(b)

Figure 1.8 (b) Iron nails and copper sulphate solutions compared before and after the experiment

Why does the iron nail become brownish in colour and the blue colour
of copper sulphate solution fade?
The following chemical reaction takes place in this Activity—

Fe(s) + CuSO, (aq) > FeSO,(aq) + Cu(s) (1.24)

(Copper sulphate) (Iron sulphate)

In this reaction, iron has displaced or removed another element,
copper, from copper sulphate solution. This reaction is known as

displacement reaction.
Other examples of displacement reactions are
Zn(s) + CuSO, (aq) > ZnSO,{aq) + Cu(s) (1.25)
(Copper sulphate) (Zine sulphate)
Pb(s) + CuCl(aq) > PbClL (aq) + Cu(s) (1.26)
(Copper chloride) (Lead chloride)

Zinc and lead are more reactive elements than copper. They displace
copper from its compounds.

1.2.4 Double Displacement Reaction

Activity 1.10

= Take about 3 mL of sodium sulphate
solution in a test tube.

= In another test tube, take about 3 mL of
barium chloride solution.

= Mix the two solutions (Fig. 1.9).

= What do you observe?

Test tube
containing solution
of sodium sulphate

Test tube
containing solution

You will observe that a white substance, which is of barium chloride

insoluble in water, is formed. This insoluble substance

formed is known as a precipitate. Any reaction that Figure 1.9
produces a precipitate can be called a precipitation reaction. Formation of barium
sulphate and sodium
Na,SO,{aq) + BaCl,(aq) > BaSO,{s) + 2NaCl(aq) (1.27) chloride
(Sodium (Barium (Barium (Sodium
sulphate) chloride) sulphate) chloride)

Chemical Reactions and Equations 1

Page_Number 11 ended
/n
Page_Number 12 started
What causes this? The white precipitate of BaSO, is formed by the
reaction of so? and Ba?*. The other product formed is sodium chloride

which remains in the solution. Such reactions in which there is an
exchange of ions between the reactants are called double displacement
reactions.

Recall Activity 1.2, where you have mixed the solutions of lead(II) nitrate

and potassium iodide.

() What was the colour of the precipitate formed? Can you name the compound
precipitated?

(ij) Write the balanced chemical equation for this reaction.

(iii) Is this also a double displacement reaction?

1.2.5 Oxidation and Reduction

China dish Activity 1.11
containing

copper power

Wi Z
sre gauze = Heat a china dish containing about 1 g

copper powder (Fig. 1.10).

Tripod stand
= What do you observe?

Burner
The surface of copper powder becomes coated with

black copper(II) oxide. Why has this black
substance formed?

This is because oxygen is added to copper and
copper oxide is formed.

Figure 1.10
Oxidation of copper to 2Cu + O, __Heat_, 2CuO (1.28)
copper oxide

If hydrogen gas is passed over this heated material (CuO), the black
coating on the surface turns brown as the reverse reaction takes place
and copper is obtained.

CuO +H,—Heal, cu+H,0 (1.29)

Ifa substance gains oxygen during a reaction, it is said to be oxidised.
If a substance loses oxygen during a reaction, it is said to be reduced.

During this reaction (1.29), the copper(II) oxide is losing oxygen and
is being reduced. The hydrogen is gaining oxygen and is being oxidised.
In other words, one reactant gets oxidised while the other gets reduced
during a reaction. Such reactions are called oxidation-reduction reactions
or redox reactions.

Oxidation

CuO +H, Heat, cu + H,O

(1.30)
Reduction

Some other examples of redox reactions are:
zno+C > Zn+CO (1.31)
MnO, +4HCl—> MnCl, + 2H,O + Cl, (1.32)

12 Science

Page_Number 12 ended
/n
Page_Number 13 started
In reaction (1.31) carbon is oxidised to CO and ZnO is reduced to Zn.
In reaction (1.32) HClis oxidised to Cl, whereas MnO, is reduced to MnCl,.

From the above examples we can say that ifa substance gains oxygen
or loses hydrogen during a reaction, it is oxidised. Ifa substance loses
oxygen or gains hydrogen during a reaction, it is reduced.

Recall Activity 1.1, where a magnesium ribbon burns with a dazzling flame in air (oxygen)
and changes into a white substance, magnesium oxide. Is magnesium being oxidised or
reduced in this reaction?

1.3 HAVE YOU OBSERVED THE EFFECTS OF OXIDATION
REACTIONS IN EVERYDAY LIFE?

1.3.1 Corrosion

You must have observed that iron articles are shiny when new, but get
coated with a reddish brown powder when left for some time. This process
is commonly known as rusting of iron. Some other metals also get
tarnished in this manner. Have you noticed the colour of the coating
formed on copper and silver? When a metal is attacked by substances
around it such as moisture, acids, etc., it is said to corrode and this
process is called corrosion. The black coating on silver and the green
coating on copper are other examples of corrosion.

Corrosion causes damage to car bodies, bridges, iron railings, ships
and to all objects made of metals, specially those of iron. Corrosion of
iron is a serious problem. Every year an enormous amount of money is
spent to replace damaged iron. You will learn more about corrosion in
Chapter 3.

1.3.2 Rancidity

Have you ever tasted or smelt the fat/oil containing food materials left
for a long time?

When fats and oils are oxidised, they become rancid and their smell
and taste change. Usually substances which prevent oxidation
(antioxidants) are added to foods containing fats and oil. Keeping food
in air tight containers helps to slow down oxidation. Do you know that
chips manufacturers usually flush bags of chips with gas such as
nitrogen to prevent the chips from getting oxidised ?

QUES TIONS

Why does the colour of copper sulphate solution change when
an iron nail is dipped in it?

Give an example of a double displacement reaction other than
the one given in Activity 1.10.

Identify the substances that are oxidised and the substances
that are reduced in the following reactions.

(i) 4Na(s) + 0,(g) > 2Na,O(s)

(i) CuO(s) + H,(g) > Cu(s) + H,O()

Chemical Reactions and Equations 13

Page_Number 13 ended
/n
Page_Number 14 started
Acomplete chemical equation represents the reactants, products and their physical
states symbolically.

Achemical equation is balanced so that the numbers of atoms of each type involved
in a chemical reaction are the same on the reactant and product sides of the
equation. Equations must always be balanced.

In a combination reaction two or more substances combine to form a new single
substance.

Decomposition reactions are opposite to combination reactions. In a decomposition
reaction, a single substance decomposes to give two or more substances.
Reactions in which heat is given out along with the products are called exothermic
reactions.

Reactions in which energy is absorbed are known as endothermic reactions.

When an element displaces another element from its compound, a displacement
reaction occurs.

Two different atoms or groups of atoms (ions) are exchanged in double displacement
reactions.

Precipitation reactions produce insoluble salts.

Reactions also involve the gain or loss of oxygen or hydrogen by substances.
Oxidation is the gain of oxygen or loss of hydrogen. Reduction is the loss of oxygen
or gain of hydrogen.

1. Which of the statements about the reaction below are incorrect?
2PbO(s) + C(s) > 2Pb(s) + CO,(g)
(a) Lead is getting reduced.
(b) Carbon dioxide is getting oxidised.
(c) Carbon is getting oxidised.
(d) Lead oxide is getting reduced.
() (a) and (b)
(ii) (a) and (c)
(iii) (a), (b) and (c)
(iv) all
2. Fe,O, + 2Al — ALO, + 2Fe
The above reaction is an example ofa
(a) combination reaction.
(b) double displacement reaction.

14 Science

Page_Number 14 ended
/n
Page_Number 15 started
(c) decomposition reaction.
(d) displacement reaction.

3. What happens when dilute hydrochloric acid is added to iron fillings? Tick the
correct answer.

(a) Hydrogen gas and iron chloride are produced.
(b) Chlorine gas and iron hydroxide are produced.
() Noreaction takes place.

(d) Iron salt and water are produced.

4. What is a balanced chemical equation? Why should chemical equations be
balanced?

5. Translate the following statements into chemical equations and then balance them.
(a) Hydrogen gas combines with nitrogen to form ammonia.
(b) Hydrogen sulphide gas burns in air to give water and sulpur dioxide.

(©) Barium chloride reacts with aluminium sulphate to give aluminium chloride
and a precipitate of barium sulphate.

(d) Potassium metal reacts with water to give potassium hydroxide and hydrogen
gas.
6. Balance the following chemical equations.
(a) HNO,+Ca(OH), > Ca(NO,), + H,O
(b) NaOH+H,SO,—Na,SO,+H,O
() NaCl+ AgNO, > AgCl+ NaNO,
(dq) BaCl,+H,SO,—> BaSO,+ HCl
7. Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions.
(a) Calcium hydroxide + Carbon dioxide — Calcium carbonate + Water
(b) Zinc + Silver nitrate > Zinc nitrate + Silver
(©) Aluminium + Copper chloride — Aluminium chloride + Copper
(d) Barium chloride + Potassium sulphate > Barium sulphate + Potassium chloride

8. Write the balanced chemical equation for the following and identify the type of
reaction in each case.

(a) Potassium bromide(aq) + Barium iodide(aq) > Potassium iodide(aq) +
Barium bromide(s)
(b) Zinc carbonate(s) > Zinc oxide(s) + Carbon dioxide(g)
() Hydrogen(g) + Chlorine(g) > Hydrogen chloride(g)
(d) Magnesium(s) + Hydrochloric acid{aq) > Magnesium chloride(aq) + Hydrogen(g)
9. What does one mean by exothermic and endothermic reactions? Give examples.
10. Why is respiration considered an exothermic reaction? Explain.

11. Why are decomposition reactions called the opposite of combination reactions?
Write equations for these reactions.

Chemical Reactions and Equations 15

Page_Number 15 ended
/n
Page_Number 16 started
. Write one equation each for decomposition reactions where energy is supplied in
the form of heat, light or electricity.

. What is the difference between displacement and double displacement reactions?
Write equations for these reactions.

In the refining of silver, the recovery of silver from silver nitrate solution involved
displacement by copper metal. Write down the reaction involved.

. What do you mean by a precipitation reaction? Explain by giving examples.

. Explain the following in terms of gain or loss of oxygen with two examples each.
(a) Oxidation
(b) Reduction

. A shiny brown coloured element ‘X’ on heating in air becomes black in colour.
Name the element ‘X’ and the black coloured compound formed.

. Why do we apply paint on iron articles?
Oil and fat containing food items are flushed with nitrogen. Why?
. Explain the following terms with one example each.
(a) Corrosion
(b) Rancidity

Perform the following activity.
Take four beakers and label them as A, B, C and D.
Put 25 mL of water in A, B and C beakers and copper sulphate solution in beaker D.
Measure and record the temperature of each liquid contained in the beakers above.

Add two spatulas of potassium sulphate, ammonium nitrate, anhydrous copper
sulphate and fine iron fillings to beakers A, B, C and D respectively and stir.

Finally measure and record the temperature of each of the mixture above.
Find out which reactions are exothermic and which ones are endothermic in nature.

16 Science

Page_Number 16 ended
/n
Page_Number 17 started
CHAPTER 2
Acids, Bases

and Salts

Yo have learnt in your previous classes that the sour and bitter
tastes of food are due to acids and bases, respectively, present in them.

If someone in the family is suffering from a problem of acidity after
overeating, which of the following would you suggest as a remedy- lemon
juice, vinegar or baking soda solution?

Which property did you think of while choosing the remedy?
Surely you must have used your knowledge about the ability of
acids and bases to nullify each other's effect.

Recall how we tested sour and bitter substances without tasting
them.

You already know that acids are sour in taste and change the colour
of blue litmus to red, whereas, bases are bitter and change the colour of
the red litmus to blue. Litmus is a natural indicator, turmeric is another
such indicator. Have you noticed that a stain of curry on a white cloth
becomes reddish-brown when soap, which is basic in nature, is scrubbed
on it? It turns yellow again when the cloth is washed with plenty of
water. You can also use synthetic indicators such as methyl orange and
phenolphthalein to test for acids and bases.

In this Chapter, we will study the reactions of acids and bases, how
acids and bases cancel out each other’s effects and many more interesting
things that we use and see in our day-to-day life.

Litmus solution is a purple dye, which is extracted from lichen, a plant belonging to
the division Thallophyta, and is commonly used as an indicator. When the litmus
solution is neither acidic nor basic, its colour is purple. There are many other natural

materials like red cabbage leaves, turmeric, coloured petals of some flowers such as
Hydrangea, Petunia and Geranium, which indicate the presence of acid or base ina
solution. These are called acid-base indicators or sometimes simply indicators.

Do You Know?


Page_Number 17 ended
/n
Page_Number 18 started
Q U ES TION

You have been provided with three test tubes. One of them contains

distilled water and the other two contain an acidic solution and a basic
solution, respectively. If you are given only red litmus paper, how will
you identify the contents of cach test tube?

2.1 UNDERSTANDING THE CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF
ACIDS AND BASES

2.1.1 Acids and Bases in the Laboratory
Activity 2.1

Collect the following samples from the science laboratory—
hydrochloric acid (HCl), sulphuric acid (H,SO,), nitric acid (HNO.),
acetic acid (CH,COOH), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), calcium
hydroxide [Ca(OH),], potassium hydroxide (KOH), magnesium
hydroxide [Mg(OH),], and ammonium hydroxide (NH,OH).

Put a drop of each of the above solutions on a watch-glass and
test with a drop of the following indicators as shown in Table 2.1.
What change in colour did you observe with red litmus, blue litmus,
phenolphthalein and methyl orange solutions for each of the
solutions taken?

Tabulate your observations in Table 2.1.

Table 2.1

Sample Red Blue Phenolph- Methyl
solution litmus litmus -thalein orange

solution solution solution solution

These indicators tell us whether a substance is acidic or basic by
change in colour. There are some substances whose odour changes in
acidic or basic media. These are called olfactory indicators. Let us try
out some of these indicators.

Activity 2.2

Take some finely chopped onions in a plastic bag along with some
strips of clean cloth. Tie up the bag tightly and leave overnight in
the fridge. The cloth strips can now be used to test for acids and
bases.

Take two of these cloth strips and check their odour.

Keep them on a clean surface and put a few drops of dilute HCl
solution on one strip and a few drops of dilute NaOH solution on
the other.

18 Science

Page_Number 18 ended
/n
Page_Number 19 started
Rinse both cloth strips with water and again check their odour.
Note your observations.

Now take some dilute vanilla essence and clove oil and check their
odour.

Take some dilute HCl solution in one test tube and dilute NaOH
solution in another. Add a few drops of dilute vanilla essence to
both test tubes and shake well. Check the odour once again and
record changes in odour, if any.

Similarly, test the change in the odour of clove oil with dilute HCl
and dilute NaOH solutions and record your observations.

Which of these — vanilla, onion and clove, can be used as olfactory
indicators on the basis of your observations?

Let us do some more activities to understand the chemical properties
of acids and bases.

2.1.2 How do Acids and Bases React with Metals?

Activity 2.3

CAUTION: This activity needs the teacher’s assistance.
Set the apparatus as shown in Fig. 2.1.
Take about 5 mL of dilute sulphuric acid in a test tube and adda
few pieces of zinc granules to it.
What do you observe on the surface of zinc granules?
Pass the gas being evolved through the soap solution.
Why are bubbles formed in the soap solution?
Take a burning candle near a gas filled bubble.
What do you observe?
Repeat this Activity with some more acids like HCl, HNO, and
CH,COOH.
Are the observations in all the cases the same or different?

Delivery tube

Stand
Burning of hydrogen
(e gas with a pop sound
Candle
Test tube ° Hyd
° rogen
Dilute 2 gas 8 O :
sulphuric v: bubbles '
; acid Ow Soap bubble filled
Zinc granules with hydrogen
x
oo
° Soap
solution

Figure 2.1 Reaction of zinc granules with dilute sulphuric acid and testing hydrogen
gas by burning

Acids, Bases and Salts 19

Page_Number 19 ended
/n
Page_Number 20 started
Note that the metal in the above reactions displaces hydrogen from
the acids. This is seen as hydrogen gas. The metal combines with the
remaining part of the acid and forms a compound called a salt. Thus,
the reaction of a metal with an acid can be summarised as —

Acid + Metal > Salt + Hydrogen gas

Can you now write the equations for the reactions you have observed?

Activity 2.4

Place a few pieces of granulated zinc metal in a test tube.

Add 2 mL of sodium hydroxide solution and warm the contents
of the test tube.

Repeat the rest of the steps as in Activity 2.3 and record your
observations.

The reaction that takes place can be written as follows.
2NaOH + Zn — Na,ZnO, + H,

(Sodium zincate)

You find again that hydrogen is formed in the reaction. However,
such reactions are not possible with all metals.

2.1.3 How do Metal Carbonates and Metal
Hydrogencarbonates React with Acids?

Thistle funnel Activity 2.5
Stand
Cork. Delivery tube Take two test tubes, label them as A
and B.
Test tube Take about 0.5 g of sodium carbonate
e: (Na,CO,) in test tube A and about
A > .\ 0.5 g of sodium hydrogencarbonate
Carbon dioxide gas (NaHCO,) in test tube B.
Dilute Test tube : Add about 2 mL of dilute HCI to both
hydrochloric ' pale the test tubes.
acid , sition What do you observe?
Sodium solution
carbonate Pass the gas produced in each case
through lime water (calcium
Figure 2.2 hydroxide solution) as shown in
Passing carbon dioxide gas Fig. 2.2 and record your observations.
through calcium hydroxide
solution

The reactions occurring in the above Activity are written as —

Test tube A: Na,CO,(s) + 2HCl(aq) — 2NaCl(aq) + H,O(l) + CO, (g)
Test tube B: NaHCO, (s) + HCl(aq) — NaCl(aq) + H,O()) + CO, (g)
On passing the carbon dioxide gas evolved through lime water,

Ca(OH), (aq) + CO,(g) > CaCO, (s) + H,O()

(Lime water) (White precipitate)

20 Science

Page_Number 20 ended
/n
Page_Number 21 started
On passing excess carbon dioxide the following reaction takes place:
CaCO, (s)+ H,O()+ CO,(g) — Ca(HCO,), (aq)

(Soluble in water)

Limestone, chalk and marble are different forms of calcium carbonate.
All metal carbonates and hydrogencarbonates react with acids to give a
corresponding salt, carbon dioxide and water.

Thus, the reaction can be summarised as —

Metal carbonate/Metal hydrogencarbonate + Acid > Salt + Carbon dioxide + Water

2.1.4 How do Acids and Bases React with each other?

Activity 2.6

Take about 2 mL of dilute NaOH solution in a test tube and add
two drops of phenolphthalein solution.

What is the colour of the solution?

Add dilute HCl solution to the above solution drop by drop.

Is there any colour change for the reaction mixture?

Why did the colour of phenolphthalein change after the addition
of an acid?

Now add a few drops of NaOH to the above mixture.

Does the pink colour of phenolphthalein reappear?

Why do you think this has happened?

In the above Activity, we have observed that the effect of a base is
nullified by an acid and vice-versa. The reaction taking place is written as -—

NaOH{(agq) + HCl(aq) > NaCl{aq) + H,O()

The reaction between an acid and a base to give a salt and water is
known as a neutralisation reaction. In general, a neutralisation reaction
can be written as —

Base + Acid > Salt + Water
2.1.5 Reaction of Metallic Oxides with Acids
Activity 2.7

Take a small amount of copper oxide in a beaker and add dilute
hydrochloric acid slowly while stirring.

Note the colour of the solution. What has happened to the copper
oxide?

You will notice that the colour of the solution becomes blue-green
and the copper oxide dissolves. The blue-green colour of the solution is
due to the formation of copper(II) chloride in the reaction. The general
reaction between a metal oxide and an acid can be written as —

Metal oxide + Acid > Salt + Water

Acids, Bases and Salts 21

Page_Number 21 ended
/n
Page_Number 22 started
Now write and balance the equation for the above reaction. Since
metallic oxides react with acids to give salts and water, similar to the
reaction of a base with an acid, metallic oxides are said to be basic oxides.

2.1.6 Reaction of a Non-metallic Oxide with Base

You saw the reaction between carbon dioxide and calcium hydroxide
(lime water) in Activity 2.5. Calcium hydroxide, which is a base, reacts
with carbon dioxide to produce a salt and water. Since this is similar to
the reaction between a base and an acid, we can conclude that non-
metallic oxides are acidic in nature.

QUESTIONS

Why should curd and sour substances not be kept in brass and copper
vessels?
Which g usually liberated when an acid reacts with a metal?

Illustrate with an example. How will you test for the presence of
this gas?

Metal compound A reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to produce
effervescence. The gas evolved extinguishes a burning candle. Write a
balanced chemical equation for the reaction if one of the compounds
formed is calcium chloride.

2.2 WHAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAVE IN
COMMON?

In Section 2.1 we have seen that all acids have similar chemical
properties. What leads to this similarity in properties? We saw in Activity
2.3 that all acids generate hydrogen gas on reacting with metals, so
hydrogen seems to be common to all acids. Let us perform an Activity to
investigate whether all compounds containing hydrogen are acidic.

Activity 2.8
6 volt battery —ay yp (7 Bap Take solutions of glucose, alcohol.

o<— Switch hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid, ete.

Fix two nails on a cork, and place the cork in

a 100 mL beaker.

Beaker Connect the nails to the two terminals of a
6 volt battery through a bulb and a switch, as
shown in Fig. 2.3.

Nail Now pour some dilute HCl in the beaker and

Dilute HCl switch on the current.

solution Repeat with dilute sulphuric acid.

Rubber What do you observe?
Repeat the experiment separately with

Figure 2.3 glucose and alcohol solutions. What do you
Acid solution in water observe now?
conducts electricity Does the bulb glow in all cases?

22 Science

Page_Number 22 ended
/n
Page_Number 23 started
The bulb will start glowing in the case of acids, as shown in Fig. 2.3.
But you will observe that glucose and alcohol solutions do not conduct
electricity. Glowing of the bulb indicates that there is a flow of electric
current through the solution. The electric current is carried through the
solution by ions.

Since the cation present in acids is H*, this suggests that acids
produce hydrogen ions, H*(aq), in solution, which are responsible for
their acidic properties.

Repeat the same Activity using alkalis such as sodium hydroxide,
calcium hydroxide, etc. What can you conclude from the results of this
Activity?

2.2.1 What Happens to an Acid or a Base in a Water Solution?

Do acids produce ions only in aqueous solution? Let us test this.

Activity 2.9

Take about 1g solid NaCl in a clean and

dry test tube and set up the apparatus as Conical flask
shown in Fig. 2.4. containing
Add some concentrated sulphuric acid to fesse
the test tube.

What do you observe? Is there a gas coming Test tube
out of the delivery tube? Sodium
Test the gas evolved successively with dry chloride

and wet blue litmus paper.

In which case does the litmus paper change
colour?

On the basis of the above Activity, what do

Moist litmus

Guard tube containing

calcium chloride

you infer about the acidic character of: Figure 2.4 Preparation of HCl gas

(ij) dry HCl gas
(ii) HCl solution?

Note to teachers: If the climate is very humid, you will have to pass the gas produced

through a guard tube (drying tube) containing calcium chloride to dry the gas.

This experiment suggests that hydrogen ions in HCl are produced
in the presence of water. The separation of H* ion from HCl molecules
cannot occur in the absence of water.

HCl+ H,O > H,O* + Cl

Hydrogen ions cannot exist alone, but they exist after combining
with water molecules. Thus hydrogen ions must always be shown as
Hi‘ (aq) or hydronium ion (H,O%).

H* + H,O > H,O*

We have seen that acids give H,O* or H*(aq) ion in water. Let us see
what happens when a base is dissolved in water.

NaOH(s) 2° wa*(aq)+OH™ faq)

Acids, Bases and Salts

23

Page_Number 23 ended
/n
Page_Number 24 started
KOH(s) —2°_, K*(aq)+ OH (aq)

Mg(OH), (s) 22 > Mg”*(aq) +201 (aq)

Bases generate hydroxide (OH) ions in water. Bases which are soluble
in water are called alkalis.

All bases do not dissolve in water. An alkali is a base that dissolves in water. They

are soapy to touch, bitter and corrosive. Never taste or touch them as they may
cause harm. Which of the bases in the Table 2.1 are alkalis?

Do You
Know?

Now as we have identified that all acids generate H*(aq) and all
bases generate OH (aq), we can view the neutralisation reaction as
follows —

Acid + Base > Salt + Water

H[X+M]OH > MX + HOH
H*(aq) + OH (aq) > H,O()

Let us see what is involved when water is mixed with an acid or a base.

Activity 2.10

Take 10 mL water in a beaker.

Add a few drops of concentrated H,SO, to it and swirl the
beaker slowly.

Touch the base of the beaker.

Is there a change in temperature?

Is this an exothermic or endothermic process?

Repeat the above Activity with sodium hydroxide pellets
and record your observations.

Figure 2.5
Warning sign displayed
on containers containing
concentrated acids ancl The process of dissolving an acid or a base in water is a highly
exothermic one. Care must be taken while mixing concentrated nitric
acid or sulphuric acid with water. The acid must always be added slowly
to water with constant stirring. Ifwater is added to a concentrated acid,
the heat generated may cause the mixture to splash out and cause burns.
The glass container may also break due to excessive local heating. Look
out for the warning sign (shown in Fig. 2.5) on the can of concentrated
sulphuric acid and on the bottle of sodium hydroxide pellets.
Mixing an acid or base with water results in decrease in the
concentration of ions (H,O*/OH) per unit volume. Such a process is
called dilution and the acid or the base is said to be diluted.

24 Science

Page_Number 24 ended
/n
Page_Number 25 started
QUES TIONS

Why do HCl, HNO,, etc., show acidic characters in aqueous solutions
while solutions of compounds like alcohol and glucose do not show acidic
character?

Why does an aqueous solution of an acid conduct electricity?

Why does dry HCI gas not change the colour of the dry litmus paper?

While diluting an acid, why is it recommended that the acid should be
added to water and not water to the acid?

How is the concentration of hydronium ions (H,O*) affected when a
solution of an acid is diluted?

How is the concentration of hydroxide ions (OH) affected when ex
base is dissolved in a solution of sodium hydroxide?

2.3 HOW STRONG ARE ACID OR BASE SOLUTIONS?

We know how acid-base indicators can be used to distinguish between
an acid and a base. We have also learnt in the previous section about
dilution and decrease in concentration of H* or OH’ ions in solutions.
Can we quantitatively find the amount of these ions present in a solution?
Can we judge how strong a given acid or base is?

We can do this by making use of a universal indicator, which is a
mixture of several indicators. The universal indicator shows different
colours at different concentrations of hydrogen ions in a solution.

Ascale for measuring hydrogen ion concentration in a solution, called
PH scale has been developed. The p in pH stands for ‘potenz in German,
meaning power. On the pH scale we can measure pH from 0 (very acidic)
to 14 (very alkaline). pH should be thought of simply as a number which
indicates the acidic or basic nature of a solution. Higher the hydronium
ion concentration, lower is the pH value.

The pH ofa neutral solution is 7. Values less than 7 on the pH scale
represent an acidic solution. As the pH value increases from 7 to 14, it
represents an increase in OH” ion concentration in the solution, that is,
increase in the strength of alkali. Generally paper impregnated with the
universal indicator is used for measuring pH. One such paper is shown
in Fig. 2.6.

Acidic nature increasing 7 Basic nature increasing

Increase in H_ ion concentration <—__ —— > Decrease in H_ ion concentration

Figure 2.6 Variation of pH with the change in concentration of H'(aq) and OH-(aq) ions

Acids, Bases and Salts 25

Page_Number 25 ended
/n
Page_Number 26 started
26

Table 2.2

eo Colour of | Approx- | Nature of
Activity 2.11 bn substance

Test the

Table 2.2.

Record your observations.
What is the nature of each
substance on the basis of
your observations?

i

Gastric
juice
(about1.2)

pH values
of solutions given in

1 Saliva (before meal)
2 Saliva (after meal)
3 Lemon juice
4 Colourless aerated
drink
5 Carrot juice
6 Coffee
7 Tomato juice
8 Tap water
9 1M NaOH
10 1M HCl
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Lemon juice Pure water, Milk of Sodium
(about 2.2) blood magnesia hydroxide
(7.4) (10) solution
(about14)

Figure 2.7 pH of some common substances shown on a pH paper (colours are only a rough guide)

The strength of acids and bases depends on the number of H* ions
and OH: ions produced, respectively. If we take hydrochloric acid and
acetic acid of the same concentration, say one molar, then these produce
different amounts of hydrogen ions. Acids that give rise to more H* ions
are said to be strong acids, and acids that give less H* ions are said to be
weak acids. Can you now say what weak and strong bases are?

2.3.1 Importance of pH in Everyday Life

Are plants and animals pH sensitive?

Our body works within the pH range of 7.0 to 7.8. Living organisms can
survive only in a narrow range of pH change. When pH of rain water is
less than 5.6, it is called acid rain. When acid rain flows into the rivers, it
lowers the pH of the river water. The survival of aquatic life in such rivers
becomes difficult.

Science

Page_Number 26 ended
/n
Page_Number 27 started
Acids in other planets

The atmosphere of venus is made up of thick white and yellowish clouds of
sulphuric acid. Do you think life can exist on this planet?

What is the pH of the soil in your backyard?

Plants require a specific pH range for their healthy growth. To find out
the pH required for the healthy growth of a plant, you can collect the soil
from various places and check the pH in the manner described below in
Activity 2.12. Also, you can note down which plants are growing in the
region from which you have collected the soil.

Activity 2.12

Put about 2 g soil in a test tube and add 5 mL water to it.

Shake the contents of the test tube.

Filter the contents and collect the filtrate in a test tube.

Check the pH of this filtrate with the help of universal
indicator paper.

What can you conclude about the ideal soil pH for the growth of
plants in your region?

PH in our digestive system

It is very interesting to note that our stomach produces hydrochloric
acid. It helps in the digestion of food without harming the stomach.
During indigestion the stomach produces too much acid and this causes
pain and irritation. To get rid of this pain, people use bases called
antacids. One such remedy must have been suggested by you at the
beginning of this Chapter. These antacids neutralise the excess acid.
Magnesium hydroxide (Milk of magnesia), a mild base, is often used for
this purpose.

pH change as the cause of tooth decay

Tooth decay starts when the pH of the mouth is lower than 5.5. Tooth
enamel, made up of calcium phosphate is the hardest substance in the
body. It does not dissolve in water, but is corroded when the pH in the
mouth is below 5.5. Bacteria present in the mouth produce acids by
degradation of sugar and food particles remaining in the mouth after
eating. The best way to prevent this is to clean the mouth after eating
food. Using toothpastes, which are generally basic, for cleaning the teeth
can neutralise the excess acid and prevent tooth decay.

Self defence by animals and plants through chemical warfare
Have you ever been stung by a honey-bee? Bee-sting leaves an acid
which causes pain and irritation. Use of a mild base like baking soda
on the stung area gives relief. Stinging hair of nettle leaves inject
methanoic acid causing burning pain.

Acids, Bases and Salts

27

Page_Number 27 ended
/n
Page_Number 28 started
Nature provides neutralisation options
Nettle is a herbaceous plant which grows in the wild. Its leaves have stinging hair,
which cause painful stings when touched accidentally. This is due to the methanoic
acid secreted by them. A traditional remedy is rubbing the

area with the leaf of the dock plant, which often grows beside
the nettle in the wild. Can you guess the nature of the dock
plant? So next time you know what to look out for if you
accidentally touch a nettle plant while trekking. Are you aware
of any other effective traditional remedies for such stings?

Do You Know?

Table 2.3 Some naturally occurring acids

sativus [ass aatertsouee | ant

Vinegar Acetic acid Sour milk (Curd) Lactic acid
Orange Citric acid Lemon Citric acid
Tamarind Tartaric acid Ant sting Methanoic acid
Tomato Oxalic acid Nettle sting Methanoic acid

QUES TION §

You have two solutions, A and B. The pH of solution A is 6 and pH of
solution B is 8. Which solution has more hydrogen ion concentration?
Which of this is acidic and which one is basic?

What effect does the concentration of H*(aq) ions have on the nature of the
solution?

Do basic solutions also have H*(aq) ions? If yes, then why are these basic?

Under what soil condition do you think a farmer would treat the soil of his
fields with quick lime (calcium oxide) or slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) or
chalk (calcium carbonate)?

2.4 MORE ABOUT SALTS

In the previous sections we have seen the formation of salts during
various reactions. Let us understand more about their preparation,
properties and uses.

2.4.1 Family of Salts
Activity 2.13

= Write the formulae of the salts given below.
Potassium sulphate, sodium sulphate, calcium sulphate,
magnesium sulphate, copper sulphate, sodium chloride, sodium
nitrate, sodium carbonate and ammonium chloride.

28 Science

Page_Number 28 ended
/n
Page_Number 29 started
= Identify the acids and bases from which the above salts may be
obtained.

= Salts having the same positive or negative radicals are said to
belong to a family. For example, NaCl and Na,SO, belong to the
family of sodium salts. Similarly, NaCl and KCl belong to the family
of chloride salts. How many families can you identify among the
salts given in this Activity?

2.4.2 pH of Salts
Activity 2.14

= Collect the following salt samples —- sodium chloride, potassium
nitrate, aluminium chloride, zinc sulphate, copper sulphate,
sodium acetate, sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogencarbonate
(some other salts available can also be taken).

= Check their solubility in water (use distilled water only).

= Check the action of these solutions on litmus and find the pH
using a pH paper.

= Which of the salts are acidic, basic or neutral?

= Identify the acid or base used to form the salt.

= Report your observations in Table 2.4.

Salts of a strong acid and a strong base Table 2.4
are neutral with pH value of 7. On the other :
hand, salts of a strong acid and weak base | sat | pH | Acidused | Base used |
are acidic with pH value less than 7 and those

of a strong base and weak acid are basic in
nature, with pH value more than 7.

2.4.3 Chemicals from Common Salt

By now you have learnt that the salt formed
by the combination of hydrochloric acid and
sodium hydroxide solution is called sodium
chloride. This is the salt that you use in food.
You must have observed in the above Activity
that it is a neutral salt.

Seawater contains many salts dissolved
init. Sodium chloride is separated from these
salts. Deposits of solid salt are also found in
several parts of the world. These large crystals
are often brown due to impurities. This is
called rock salt. Beds of rock salt were formed
when seas of bygone ages dried up. Rock salt
is mined like coal.

You must have heard about Mahatma Gandhi's Dandi March. Did
you know that sodium chloride was such an important symbol in our
struggle for freedom?

Acids, Bases and Salts 29

Page_Number 29 ended
/n
Page_Number 30 started
Common salt — A raw material for chemicals
The common salt thus obtained is an important raw material for various
materials of daily use, such as sodium hydroxide, baking soda, washing
soda, bleaching powder and many more. Let us see how one substance
is used for making all these different substances.

Sodium hydroxide

When electricity is passed through an aqueous solution of sodium
chloride (called brine), it decomposes to form sodium hydroxide. The
process is called the chlor-alkali process because of the products formed-—
chlor for chlorine and alkali for sodium hydroxide.

2NaCl(aq) + 2H,O(l) > 2NaOH{aq) + C1,(g) + H,(g)

Chlorine gas is given off at the anode, and hydrogen gas at the cathode.
Sodium hydroxide solution is formed near the cathode. The three
products produced in this process are all useful. Figure 2.8 shows the
different uses of these products.

at Cathode

Fuels, margarine, Water treatment, swimming pools, De-greasing metals, soaps and detergents,
ammonia for fertilisers PVC, disinfectants, CFCs, pesticides paper making, artificial fibres
HYDROCHLORIC ACID BLEACH
For: cleaning steel, ammonium chloride, For: household bleaches,
medicines, cosmetics bleaching fabric

Figure 2.8 Important products from the chlor-alkali process

Bleaching powder

You have already come to know that chlorine is produced during the
electrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride (brine). This chlorine gas is used
for the manufacture of bleaching powder. Bleaching powder is produced
by the action of chlorine on dry slaked lime [Ca(OH),]. Bleaching powder
is represented as CaOCl,, though the actual composition is quite
complex.

Ca(OH), + Cl, > CaOCl, + H,O

Science

Page_Number 30 ended
/n
Page_Number 31 started
Bleaching powder is used —

(i) for bleaching cotton and linen in the textile industry, for bleaching
wood pulp in paper factories and for bleaching washed clothes
in laundry;

(ii) as an oxidising agent in many chemical industries; and
(iii) for disinfecting drinking water to make it free of germs.

Baking soda

The soda commonly used in the kitchen for making tasty crispy pakoras
is baking soda. Sometimes it is added for faster cooking. The chemical
name of the compound is sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCOQ,). It is
produced using sodium chloride as one of the raw materials.

NaCl + H,0 + CO, + NH, > NH,Cl + NaHCO,

(Ammonium (Sodium
chloride) hydrogencarbonate)

Did you check the pH of sodium hydrogencarbonate in Activity 2.14?
Can you correlate why it can be used to neutralise an acid? It is a mild
non-corrosive base. The following reaction takes place when it is heated
during cooking —

2NaHCo, —H&@!_, na,CO, +H,O0+CO,

(Sodium (Sodium
hydrogencarbonate) carbonate)

Sodium hydrogencarbonate has got various uses in the household.

Uses of sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCO,)

(i) For making baking powder, which is a mixture of baking soda
(sodium hydrogencarbonate) and a mild edible acid such as
tartaric acid. When baking powder is heated or mixed in water,
the following reaction takes place —

NaHCO,+H* — CO, +H,O + Sodium salt of acid
(From any acid)

Carbon dioxide produced during the reaction causes bread or cake

to rise making them soft and spongy.

(ii) Sodium hydrogencarbonate is also an ingredient in antacids.
Being alkaline, it neutralises excess acid in the stomach and
provides relief.

(iii) It is also used in soda-acid fire extinguishers.

Washing soda

Another chemical that can be obtained from sodium chloride is
Na,CO,.10H,O (washing soda). You have seen above that sodium
carbonate can be obtained by heating baking soda; recrystallisation of
sodium carbonate gives washing soda. It is also a basic salt.

Na,CO; + 10H,O0>Na,CO;.10H,O

(Sodium
carbonate)

Acids, Bases and Salts

31

Page_Number 31 ended
/n
Page_Number 32 started
Figure 2.9
Removing water
of crystallisation

32

What does 10H,0 signify? Does it make Na,CO, wet? We will address
this question in the next section.

Sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogencarbonate are useful
chemicals for many industrial processes as well.

Uses of washing soda
(i) Sodium carbonate (washing soda) is used in glass, soap and
paper industries.
(ii) It is used in the manufacture of sodium compounds such as borax.
(iii) Sodium carbonate can be used as a cleaning agent for domestic
purposes.
(iv) It is used for removing permanent hardness of water.

2.4.4 Are the Crystals of Salts really Dry?

Activity 2.15

Heat a few crystals of copper sulphate
in a dry boiling tube.

What is the colour of the copper
sulphate after heating?

Do you notice water droplets in the
boiling tube? Where have these come
from?

Add 2-3 drops of water on the sample
Burner of copper sulphate obtained after
heating.

What do you observe? Is the blue
colour of copper sulphate restored?

Test tube holder
Boiling tube
Water droplets

Copper sulphate cystals

Copper sulphate crystals which seem to be dry contain water of
crystallisation. When we heat the crystals, this water is removed and the
salt turns white.

Ifyou moisten the crystals again with water, you will find that blue
colour of the crystals reappears.

Water of crystallisation is the fixed number of water molecules present
in one formula unit of a salt. Five water molecules are present in one
formula unit of copper sulphate. Chemical formula for hydrated copper
sulphate is Cu SO,. 5H,O. Now you would be able to answer the question
whether the molecule of Na,CO,.10H,O is wet.

One other salt, which possesses water of crystallisation is gypsum.
It has two water molecules as water of cyrstallisation. It has the formula
CaSO,.2H,0O. Let us look into the use of this salt.

Plaster of Paris
On heating gypsum at 373 K, it loses water molecules and becomes

1
calcium sulphate hemihydrate (CaSO, 3 HO). This is called Plaster of

Science

Page_Number 32 ended
/n
Page_Number 33 started
Paris, the substance which doctors use as plaster for supporting
fractured bones in the right position. Plaster of Paris is a white powder
and on mixing with water, it changes to gypsum once again giving a
hard solid mass.

CaSO, 5 H,0 + 15 11,0 CaSO, .2H,0

(Plaster of Paris) (Gypsum)

Note that only half a water molecule is shown to be attached as water
of crystallisation. How can you get half a water molecule? It is written in
this form because two formula units of CaSO, share one molecule of
water. Plaster of Paris is used for making toys, materials for decoration
and for making surfaces smooth. Try to find out why is calcium sulphate
hemihydrate called ‘Plaster of Paris’ ?

QU ES TION §

What is the common name of the compound CaOCl,?

Name the substance which on treatment with chlorine yields bleaching
powder.

Name the sodium compound which is used for softening hard water.

What will happen if a solution of sodium hydrocarbonate is heated?
Give the equation of the reaction involved.

Write an equation to show the reaction between Plaster of Paris and
water.

=  Acid-base indicators are dyes or mixtures of dyes which are used to indicate the
presence of acids and bases.

= Acidic nature of a substance is due to the formation of H*(aq) ions in solution.
Formation of OH(aq) ions in solution is responsible for the basic nature of a
substance.

= When an acid reacts with a metal, hydrogen gas is evolved and a corresponding
salt is formed.

= When a base reacts with a metal, along with the evolution of hydrogen gas a salt is
formed which has a negative ion composed of the metal and oxygen.

= When an acid reacts with a metal carbonate or metal hydrogencarbonate, it gives
the corresponding salt, carbon dioxide gas and water.

= Acidic and basic solutions in water conduct electricity because they produce
hydrogen and hydroxide ions respectively.

Acids, Bases and Salts 33

Page_Number 33 ended
/n
Page_Number 34 started
34

The strength of an acid or an alkali can be tested by using a scale called the pH
scale (0-14) which gives the measure of hydrogen ion concentration in a solution.

A neutral solution has a pH of exactly 7, while an acidic solution has a pH less
than 7 and a basic solution a pH more than 7.

Living beings carry out their metabolic activities within an optimal pH range.
Mixing concentrated acids or bases with water is a highly exothermic process.

Acids and bases neutralise each other to form corresponding salts and water.

Waiter of crystallisation is the fixed number of water molecules chemically attached
to each formula unit of a salt in its crystalline form.

Salts have various uses in everyday life and in industries.

Asolution turns red litmus blue, its pH is likely to be
(a) 1 (b) 4 () 5 (d) 10

. Asolution reacts with crushed egg-shells to give a gas that turns lime-water milky.

The solution contains
(a) NaCl (b) HCl () LiCl (J) KCL
10 mL of a solution of NaOH is found to be completely neutralised by 8 mL of a

given solution of HCl. If we take 20 mL of the same solution of NaOH, the amount
HC! solution (the same solution as before) required to neutralise it will be

(a) 4mL (b) 8SmL (c) 12mL (dq) 16 mL

. Which one of the following types of medicines is used for treating indigestion?

(a) Antibiotic

(b) Analgesic
(c) Antacid
(d) Antiseptic

. Write word equations and then balanced equations for the reaction taking

place when —

(a) dilute sulphuric acid reacts with zinc granules.

(b) dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with magnesium ribbon.
(c) dilute sulphuric acid reacts with aluminium powder.

(d) dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with iron filings.

. Compounds such as alcohols and glucose also contain hydrogen but are not

categorised as acids. Describe an Activity to prove it.

. Why does distilled water not conduct electricity, whereas rain water does?

Science

Page_Number 34 ended
/n
Page_Number 35 started
. Why do acids not show acidic behaviour in the absence of water?

. Five solutions A,B,C,D and E when tested with universal indicator showed pH as
4,1,11,7 and 9, respectively. Which solution is
(a) neutral?
(b) strongly alkaline?
(c) strongly acidic?
(d) weakly acidic?
(e) weakly alkaline?
Arrange the pH in increasing order of hydrogen-ion concentration.

. Equal lengths of magnesium ribbons are taken in test tubes A and B. Hydrochloric

acid (HCl) is added to test tube A, while acetic acid (CH,COOH) is added to test
tube B. In which test tube will the fizzing occur more vigorously and why?

. Fresh milk has a pH of 6. How do you think the pH will change as it turns into
curd? Explain your answer.

. Amilkman adds a very small amount of baking soda to fresh milk.
(a) Why does he shift the pH of the fresh milk from 6 to slightly alkaline?
(b) Why does this milk take a long time to set as curd?

. Plaster of Paris should be stored in a moisture-proof container. Explain why?
. What is a neutralisation reaction? Give two examples.

. Give two important uses of washing soda and baking soda.

(I) Prepare your own indicator
Crush beetroot in a mortar.
Add sufficient water to obtain the extract.
Filter the extract by the procedure learnt by you in earlier classes.
Collect the filtrate to test the substances you may have tasted earlier.

Arrange four test tubes in a test tube stand and label them as A,B,C and D. Pour
2 mL each of lemon juice solution, soda-water, vinegar and baking soda solution
in them respectively.

Put 2-3 drops of the beetroot extract in each test tube and note the colour change
ifany. Write your observation in a Table.

You can prepare indicators by using other natural materials like extracts of red
cabbage leaves, coloured petals of some flowers such as Petunia, Hydrangea and
Geranium.

Acids, Bases and Salts 35

Page_Number 35 ended
/n
Page_Number 36 started
(Il) Preparing a soda-acid fire extinguisher

The reaction of acids with metal hydrogencarbonates is used in the fire extinguishers
which produce carbon dioxide.

Take 20 mL of sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCO,) solution in a wash-bottle.

Suspend an ignition tube containing dilute sulphuric acid in the wash-bottle
(Fig. 2.10).

Close the mouth of the wash-bottle.

Tilt the wash-bottle so that the acid from the ignition tube mixes with the sodium
hydrogencarbonate solution below.

You will notice an effervescence coming out of the nozzle.
Direct this gas on a burning candle. What happens?

Nozzle

<3 = Carbon dioxide

OC gas
Thread
Wash-bottle
Ignition tube
Dilute sulphuric
acid

Sodium
hydrogencarbonate

(a)

Figure 2.10 (a) Ignition tube containing dilute sulphuric acid suspended in a wash-bottle containing
sodium hydrogencarbonate, (b) Carbon dioxide gas coming out of the nozzle

36 Science

Page_Number 36 ended
/n
Page_Number 37 started
CHAPTER 3

| Metals and Non-metals

n Class IX you have learnt about various elements. You have seen
that elements can be classified as metals or non-metals on the basis of
their properties.
Think of some uses of metals and non-metals in your daily life.
What properties did you think of while categorising elements
as metals or non-metals?
How are these properties related to the uses of these elements?
Let us look at some of these properties in detail.

3.1 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
3.1.1 Metals

The easiest way to start grouping substances is by comparing their
physical properties. Let us study this with the help of the following
activities. For Activities 3.1 to 3.6, collect the samples of following
metals — iron, copper, aluminium, magnesium, sodium, lead, zinc and
any other metal that is easily available.

Activity 3.1

Take samples of iron, copper, aluminium and magnesium. Note
the appearance of each sample.

Clean the surface of each sample by rubbing them with sand paper
and note their appearance again.

Metals, in their pure state, have a shining surface. This property is
called metallic lustre.

Activity 3.2

Take small pieces of iron, copper, aluminium, and magnesium.
Try to cut these metals with a sharp knife and note your
observations.

Hold a piece of sodium metal with a pair of tongs.
CAUTION: Always handle sodium metal with care. Dry it by
pressing between the folds of a filter paper.

Put it on a watch-glass and try to cut it with a knife.

What do you observe?

Page_Number 37 ended
/n
Page_Number 38 started
You will find that metals are generally hard. The hardness varies
from metal to metal.

Activity 3.3

Take pieces of iron, zinc, lead and copper.

Place any one metal on a block of iron and strike it four or five
times with a hammer. What do you observe?

Repeat with other metals.

Record the change in the shape of these metals.

You will find that some metals can be beaten into thin sheets. This
property is called malleability. Did you know that gold and silver are the
most malleable metals?

Activity 3.4

Consider some metals such as iron, copper, aluminium, lead, etc.
Which of the above metals are also available in the form of wires?

The ability of metals to be drawn into thin wires is called ductility.
Gold is the most ductile metal. You will be surprised to know that a wire
of about 2 km length can be drawn from one gram of gold.

It is because of their malleability and ductility that metals can be
given different shapes according to our needs.

Can you name some metals that are used for making cooking vessels?
Do you know why these metals are used for making vessels? Let us do
the following Activity to find out the answer.

Activity 3.5

Take an aluminium or copper
wire. Clamp this wire on a
Free end of wire stand, as shown in Fig. 3.1.
We Fix a pin to the free end of the
wire using wax.
Heat the wire with a spirit lamp.
candle or a burner near the
place where it is clamped.
What do you observe after some
time?
Note your observations. Does
the metal wire melt?

Stand ——— Metal wire
Clamp |

Figure 3.1
Metals are good

The above activity shows that metals are good conductors of heat
conductors of heat.

and have high melting points. The best conductors ofheat are silver and
copper. Lead and mercury are comparatively poor conductors of heat.

Do metals also conduct electricity? Let us find out.

38 Science

Page_Number 38 ended
/n
Page_Number 39 started
Activity 3.6

Set up an electric circuit as shown in Fig. 3.2.
Place the metal to be tested in the circuit
between terminals A and B as shown.

Does the bulb glow? What does this indicate?

Insert sample
to be tested

You must have seen that the wires that carry current
in your homes have a coating of polyvinylchloride (PVC)
or a rubber-like material. Why are electric wires coated Figure 3.2
with such substances? Metals are good

What happens when metals strike a hard surface? Do they produce conductors of electricity.
a sound? The metals that produce a sound on striking a hard surface
are said to be sonorous. Can you now say why school bells are made of
metals?

3.1.2 Non-metals

In the previous Class you have learnt that there are very few non-metals
as compared to metals. Some of the examples of non-metals are carbon,
sulphur, iodine, oxygen, hydrogen, etc. The non-metals are either solids
or gases except bromine which is a liquid.

Do non-metals also have physical properties similar to that of metals?
Let us find out.

Activity 3.7

Collect samples of carbon (coal or graphite), sulphur and iodine.
Carry out the Activities 3.1 to 3.6 with these non-metals and record
your observations.

Compile your observations regarding metals and non-metals in Table 3.1.

Table 3.1

Type of | Hardness | Malleability | Conduction |
surface Eg Electricity

On the bases of the observations recorded in Table 3.1, discuss the
general physical properties of metals and non-metals in the class. You
must have concluded that we cannot group elements according to their
physical properties alone, as there are many exceptions. For example -—

() All metals except mercury exist as solids at room temperature.
In Activity 3.5, you have observed that metals have high melting

Metals and Non-metals 39

Page_Number 39 ended
/n
Page_Number 40 started
40

points but gallium and caesium have very low melting points.
These two metals will melt if you keep them on your palm.

(ii) Iodine is a non-metal but it is lustrous.

(iii) Carbon is a non-metal that can exist in different forms. Each
form is called an allotrope. Diamond, an allotrope of carbon, is
the hardest natural substance known and has a very high melting
and boiling point. Graphite, another allotrope of carbon, is a
conductor of electricity.

(iv) Alkali metals (lithium, sodium, potassium) are so soft that they
can be cut with a knife. They have low densities and low melting
points.

Elements can be more clearly classified as metals and non-metals
on the basis of their chemical properties.

Activity 3.8

Take a magnesium ribbon and some sulphur powder.

Burn the magnesium ribbon. Collect the ashes formed and dissolve
them in water.

Test the resultant solution with both red and blue litmus paper.
Is the product formed on burming magnesium acidic or basic?
Now burn sulphur powder. Place a test tube over the burning
sulphur to collect the fumes produced.

Add some water to the above test tube and shake.

Test this solution with blue and red litmus paper.

Is the product formed on burning sulphur acidic or basic?

Can you write equations for these reactions?

Most non-metals produce acidic oxides when dissolve in water. On
the other hand, most metals, give rise to basic oxides. You will be learning
more about these metal oxides in the next section.

Give an example of a metal which

(i) is a liquid at room temperature.
(ii) can be easily cut with a knife.
(iii) is the best conductor of heat.

(iv) is a poor conductor of heat.

Explain the meanings of malleable and ductile.

3.2 CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF METALS

We will learn about the chemical properties of metals in the following
Sections 3.2.1 to 3.2.4. For this, collect the samples of following metals —
aluminium, copper, iron, lead, magnesium, zinc and sodium.

Science

Page_Number 40 ended
/n
Page_Number 41 started
3.2.1 What happens when Metals are burnt in Air?

You have seen in Activity 3.8 that magnesium burns in air with a dazzling
white flame. Do all metals react in the same manner? Let us check by
performing the following Activity.

Activity 3.9

CAUTION: The following activity needs the teacher’s assistance.
It would be better if students wear eye protection.

Hold any of the samples taken above with a pair of tongs and try
burning over a flame. Repeat with the other metal samples.
Collect the product if formed.

Let the products and the metal surface cool down.

Which metals burn easily?

What flame colour did you observe when the metal burnt?

How does the metal surface appear after burning?

Arrange the metals in the decreasing order of their reactivity
towards oxygen.

Are the products soluble in water?

Almost all metals combine with oxygen to form metal oxides.
Metal + Oxygen > Metal oxide

For example, when copper is heated in air, it combines with oxygen
to form copper(II) oxide, a black oxide.

2Cu + O, > 2Cud

(Copper) (Copper(II) oxide)
Similarly, aluminium forms aluminium oxide.

4Al + 30, > 2A1,0,

(Aluminium) (Aluminium oxide)

Recall from Chapter 2, how copper oxide reacts with hydrochloric acid.
We have learnt that metal oxides are basic in nature. But some metal
oxides, such as aluminium oxide, zinc oxide, etc., show both acidic as
well as basic behaviour. Such metal oxides which react with both acids as

well as bases to produce salts and water are known as amphoteric oxides.
Aluminium oxide reacts in the following manner with acids and bases -

AlO,+6HCl — 2AIC], + 3H,O
Al,O,+2NaOH > 2NaAlO, + H,O

(Sodium
aluminate)

Most metal oxides are insoluble in water but some of these dissolve
in water to form alkalis. Sodium oxide and potassium oxide dissolve in
water to produce alkalis as follows —

Na,O(s) + H,O(l) = 2NaOH{aq)
K,O(s) + H,O(l) = 2KOH(aq)

Metals and Non-metals 41

Page_Number 41 ended
/n
Page_Number 42 started
Do You Know?

42

We have observed in Activity 3.9 that all metals do not react with
oxygen at the same rate. Different metals show different reactivities
towards oxygen. Metals such as potassium and sodium react so
vigorously that they catch fire if kept in the open. Hence, to protect them
and to prevent accidental fires, they are kept immersed in kerosene oil.
At ordinary temperature, the surfaces of metals such as magnesium,
aluminium, zinc, lead, etc., are covered with a thin layer of oxide. The
protective oxide layer prevents the metal from further oxidation. Iron
does not burn on heating but iron filings burn vigorously when sprinkled
in the flame of the burner. Copper does not burn, but the hot metal is
coated with a black coloured layer of copper(II) oxide. Silver and gold do
not react with oxygen even at high temperatures.

Anodising is a process of forming a thick oxide layer of aluminium. Aluminium
develops a thin oxide layer when exposed to air. This aluminium oxide coat makes it
resistant to further corrosion. The resistance can be improved further by making the

oxide layer thicker. During anodising, a clean aluminium article is made the anode
and is electrolysed with dilute sulphuric acid. The oxygen gas evolved at the anode
reacts with aluminium to make a thicker protective oxide layer. This oxide layer can
be dyed easily to give aluminium articles an attractive finish.

After performing Activity 3.9, you must have observed that sodium
is the most reactive of the samples of metals taken here. The reaction of
magnesium is less vigorous implying that it is not as reactive as sodium.
But burning in oxygen does not help us to decide about the reactivity of
zinc, iron, copper or lead. Let us see some more reactions to arrive at a
conclusion about the order of reactivity of these metals.

3.2.2 What happens when Metals react with Water?
Activity 3.10

CAUTION: This Activity needs the teacher’s assistance.
Collect the samples of the same metals as in Activity 3.9.

Put small pieces of the samples separately in beakers half-filled
with cold water.

Which metals reacted with cold water? Arrange them in the
increasing order of their reactivity with cold water.

Did any metal produce fire on water?
Does any metal start floating after some time?

Put the metals that did not react with cold water in beakers
half-filled with hot water.

For the metals that did not react with hot water, arrange the
apparatus as shown in Fig. 3.3 and observe their reaction with steam.
Which metals did not react even with steam?

Arrange the metals in the decreasing order of reactivity with water.

Science

Page_Number 42 ended
/n
Page_Number 43 started
Metal sample
Hydrogen
Glass-wool

soaked in
water

Burner

Figure 3.3 Action of steam on a metal

Metals react with water and produce a metal oxide and hydrogen
gas. Metal oxides that are soluble in water dissolve in it to further form
metal hydroxide. But all metals do not react with water.

Metal + Water — Metal oxide + Hydrogen
Metal oxide + Water — Metal hydroxide

Metals like potassium and sodium react violently with cold water. In
case of sodium and potassium, the reaction is so violent and exothermic
that the evolved hydrogen immediately catches fire.

2K(s) +2H,O(l) ~ 2KOH[aq) + H,(g) + heat energy
2Na(s) + 2H,O(l) > 2NaOH(aq) + H,(g) + heat energy

The reaction of calcium with water is less violent. The heat evolved is
not sufficient for the hydrogen to catch fire.

Ca(s) + 2H,O(1) > Ca(OH),(aq) + H,(g)

Calcium starts floating because the bubbles of hydrogen gas formed
stick to the surface of the metal.

Magnesium does not react with cold water. It reacts with hot water
to form magnesium hydroxide and hydrogen. It also starts floating due
to the bubbles of hydrogen gas sticking to its surface.

Metals like aluminium, iron and zinc do not react either with cold or
hot water. But they react with steam to form the metal oxide and hydrogen.

2Al(s) + 3H,O(g) > Al,O,(s) + 3H,(g)
3Fe(s) + 4H,O(g) > Fe,0,(s) + 4H, (9)

Metals such as lead, copper, silver and gold do not react with water at all.

3.2.3 What happens when Metals react with Acids?

You have already learnt that metals react with acids to give a salt and
hydrogen gas.

Metals and Non-metals

Page_Number 43 ended
/n
Page_Number 44 started
Metal + Dilute acid > Salt + Hydrogen
But do all metals react in the same manner? Let us find out.

Activity 3.11

Collect all the metal samples except sodium and potassium again.
If the samples are tarnished, rub them clean with sand paper.
CAUTION: Do not take sodium and potassium as they react
vigorously even with cold water.

Put the samples separately in test tubes containing dilute
hydrochloric acid.

Suspend thermometers in the test tubes, so that their bulbs are
dipped in the acid.

Observe the rate of formation of bubbles carefully.

Which metals reacted vigorously with dilute hydrochloric acid?
With which metal did you record the highest temperature?
Arrange the metals in the decreasing order of reactivity with dilute
acids.

Write equations for the reactions of magnesium, aluminium, zinc
and iron with dilute hydrochloric acid.

Hydrogen gas is not evolved when a metal reacts with nitric acid. It is
because HNO, is a strong oxidising agent. It oxidises the H, produced to
water and itself gets reduced to any of the nitrogen oxides (N,O, NO,
NO,). But magnesium (Mg) and manganese (Mn) react with very dilute
HNO, to evolve H, gas.

You must have observed in Activity 3.11, that the rate of formation
of bubbles was the fastest in the case of magnesium. The reaction was
also the most exothermic in this case. The reactivity decreases in the
order Mg > Al > Zn > Fe. In the case of copper, no bubbles were seen and
the temperature also remained unchanged. This shows that copper does
not react with dilute HCl.

Aqua regia. (Latin for ‘royal water’) is a freshly prepared mixture of concentrated
hydrochloric acid and concentrated nitric acid in the ratio of 3:1. It can dissolve

gold, even though neither of these acids can do so alone. Aqua regia is a highly
corrosive, fuming liquid. It is one of the few reagents that is able to dissolve gold and
platinum.

Do You Know?

3.2.4 How do Metals react with Solutions of other Metal
Salts?

Activity 3.12

Take a clean wire of copper and an iron nail.

Put the copper wire in a solution of iron sulphate and the iron
nail in a solution of copper sulphate taken in test tubes (Fig. 3.4).
Record your observations after 20 minutes.

44 Science

Page_Number 44 ended
/n
Page_Number 45 started
In which test tube did you find that a reaction has occurred?
On what basis can you say that a reaction has actually taken
place?

Can you correlate your observations for the Activities 3.9, 3.10
and 3.11?

Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction that has taken
place.

Name the type of reaction.

Reactive metals can displace less
reactive metals from their compounds in
solution or molten form.

We have seen in the previous sections
that all metals are not equally reactive. We Test tube
checked the reactivity of various metals [on nail
with oxygen, water and acids. But all — copper
metals do not react with these reagents. sulphate
So we were not able to put all the metal solution
samples we had collected in decreasing
order of their reactivity. Displacement
reactions studied in Chapter 1 give better
evidence about the reactivity of metals. It
is simple and easy if metal A displaces
metal B from its solution, it is more reactive than B.

Metal A+ Salt solution of B > Salt solution of A+ Metal B

Which metal, copper or iron, is more reactive according to your
observations in Activity 3.12?

3.2.5 The Reactivity Series

The reactivity series is a list of metals arranged in the order of their
decreasing activities. After performing displacement experiments
(Activities 1.9 and 3.12), the following series, (Table 3.2) known as the
reactivity or activity series has been developed.

Table 3.2 Activity series : Relative reactivities of metals

K Potassium Most reactive
Na Sodium

Ca Calcium

Mg Magnesium

Al Aluminium

Zn Zinc Reactivity decreases
Ne Iron

Pb Lead

H Hydrogen

Cu Copper

Hg Mercury

Ag Silver

Au Gold Least reactive

Metals and Non-metals

Test tube
stand

Copper wire

Iron sulphate
solution

Iron nail

Figure 3.4
Reaction of metals with
salt solutions

45

Page_Number 45 ended
/n
Page_Number 46 started
Why is sodium kept immersed in kerosene oil?
Write equations for the reactions of
(ij) iron with steam
(ii) calcium and potassium with water
Samples of four metals A, B, C and D were taken and added to the

following solution one by one. The results obtained have been tabulated
as follows.

| Metal | Tron(II) sulphate Copper(II) sulphate Zine sulphate Silver nitrate

No reaction Displacement

Displacement No reaction

No reaction No reaction No reaction Displacement
No reaction No reaction No reaction No reaction

Use the Table above to answer the following questions about metals

A, B, C and D.

(i) Which is the most reactive metal?

(ii) What would you observe if B is added to a solution of Copper(II)
sulphate?

(iii) Arrange the metals A, B, C and D in the order of decreasing
reactivily.

Which gas is produced when dilute hydrochloric acid is added to a

reactive metal? Write the chemical reaction when iron reacts with dilute

H,SO,.

What would you observe when zinc is added to a solution of iron(II)
sulphate? Write the chemical reaction that takes place.

3.3 HOW DO METALS AND NON-METALS REACT?

In the above activities, you saw the reactions of metals with a number of
reagents. Why do metals react in this manner? Let us recall what we
learnt about the electronic configuration of elements in Class LX. We
learnt that noble gases, which have a completely filled valence shell, show
little chemical activity. We, therefore, explain the reactivity of elements
as a tendency to attain a completely filled valence shell.

Let us have a look at the electronic configuration of noble gases and
some metals and non-metals.

We can see from Table 3.3 that a sodium atom has one electron in its
outermost shell. If it loses the electron from its M shell then its L shell
now becomes the outermost shell and that has a stable octet. The nucleus
of this atom still has 11 protons but the number of electrons has
become 10, so there is a net positive charge giving us a sodium cation
Na*. On the other hand chlorine has seven electrons in its outermost shell

46 Science

Page_Number 46 ended
/n
Page_Number 47 started
Table 3.3 Electronic configuration of some elements

Type of Atomic Number of
element number electrons in shells
K L M N

Noble gases Helium (He) 2 2

Neon (Ne) 10 2 8

Argon (Ar) 18 2 8 8
Metals Sodium (Na) 11 2 8 1

Magnesium (Mg) 12 2 8 2

Aluminium (Al) 13 2 8 3

Potassium (K) 19 2 8 8 1

Calcium (Ca) 20 2 8 8 2
Non-metals Nitrogen (N) 2 5

Oxygen (O) 2 6

Fluorine (F) 2 7

Phosphorus (P) 15 2 8

Sulphur (S) 16 2 8

Chlorine (Cl) 17 2 8

and it requires one more electron to complete its octet. Ifsodium and chlorine
were to react, the electron lost by sodium could be taken up by chlorine.
After gaining an electron, the chlorine atom gets a unit negative charge,
because its nucleus has 17 protons and there are 18 electrons in its K, L
and M shells. This gives us a chloride anion Cl-. So both these elements
can have a give-and-take relation between them as follows (Fig. 3.5).

Na> Na*+e

2.8.1 2,8

(Sodium cation)

Cl te 3 Cl
2,8,7 2,8,8
(Chloride anion)

Nex, x xe
Na + xCl x— (Na’ kl ¥
* x x

x

Figure 3.5 Formation of sodium chloride

Sodium and chloride ions, being oppositely charged, attract each
other and are held by strong electrostatic forces of attraction to exist as
sodium chloride (NaCl). It should be noted that sodium chloride does
not exist as molecules but aggregates of oppositely charged ions.

Let us see the formation of one more ionic compound, magnesium
chloride (Fig. 3.6).

Metals and Non-metals

47

Page_Number 47 ended
/n
Page_Number 48 started
2,8,7 2,8,8
(Chloride anion)
x x
x x xx
Mg: + wy —>(Mg”) eis]
\ sets
x x

Figure 3.6 Formation of magnesium chloride

The compounds formed in this manner by the transfer of electrons
from a metal to a non-metal are known as ionic compounds or
electrovalent compounds. Can you name the cation and anion present
in MgCl,?

3.3.1 Properties of lonic Compounds
To learn about the properties of ionic compounds, let us perform the

following Activity:
Spatula
containing a
sample Activity 3.13

Take samples of sodium chloride. potassium iodide, barium
chloride or any other salt from the science laboratory.
What is the physical state of these salts?

Take a small amount of a sample on a metal spatula and
heat directly on the flame (Fig. 3.7). Repeat with other samples.
What did you observe? Did the samples impart any colour
to the flame? Do these compounds melt?

Try to dissolve the samples in water, petrol and kerosene.

Figure 3.7 Are they soluble?
Heating a salt sample on a Make a circuit as shown in Fig. 3.8 and insert the electrodes
spatula into a solution of one salt. What did you observe? Test the
Battery Bulb other salt samples too in this manner.
iH £ gr. Switch What is your inference about the nature of these
compounds?

Table 3.4 Melting and boiling points of some ionic compounds
Beaker

Graphite rod

Salt solution NaCl 1074 1686
under test
LiCl 887 1600
CaCcl, 1045 1900
Figure 3.8 CaO 2850 3120

Testing the conductivity of

asalt solution MgCl, 981 1685

48 Science

Page_Number 48 ended
/n
Page_Number 49 started
You may have observed the following general properties for ionic

compounds—

(i) Physical nature: lonic compounds are solids and are somewhat
hard because of the strong force of attraction between the positive
and negative ions. These compounds are generally brittle and
break into pieces when pressure is applied.

(ii) Melting and Boiling points: lonic compounds have high melting
and boiling points (see Table 3.4). This is because a considerable
amount of energy is required to break the strong inter-ionic
attraction.

(iii) Solubility: Electrovalent compounds are generally soluble in
water and insoluble in solvents such as kerosene, petrol, etc.

(iv) Conduction of Electricity: The conduction of electricity through
a solution involves the movement of charged particles. A solution
of an ionic compound in water contains ions, which move to the
opposite electrodes when electricity is passed through the
solution. Ionic compounds in the solid state do not conduct
electricity because movement of ions in the solid is not possible
due to their rigid structure. But ionic compounds conduct
electricity in the molten state. This is possible in the molten state
since the elecrostatic forces of attraction between the oppositely
charged ions are overcome due to the heat. Thus, the ions move
freely and conduct electricity.

Write the electron-dot structures for sodium, oxygen and
magnesium.

(ii) Show the formation of Na,O and MgO by the transfer of electrons.

(iii) What are the ions present in these compounds?
Why do ionic compounds have high melting points?

3.4 OCCURRENCE OF METALS

The earth’s crust is the major source of metals. Seawater also contains
some soluble salts such as sodium chloride, magnesium chloride, etc.
The elements or compounds, which occur naturally in the earth’s crust,
are known as minerals. At some places, minerals contain a very high
percentage ofa particular metal and the metal can be profitably extracted
from it. These minerals are called ores.

3.4.1 Extraction of Metals

You have learnt about the reactivity series of metals. Having this
knowledge, you can easily understand how a metal is extracted from its
ore. Some metals are found in the earth’s crust in the free state. Some
are found in the form of their compounds. The metals at the bottom of
the activity series are the least reactive. They are often found in a free

Metals and Non-metals 49

Page_Number 49 ended
/n
Page_Number 50 started
Electrolysis

zn

Fe . .
Reduction using

Pb carbon

Found in native
Au state

Figure 3.9
Activity series and
related metallurgy

state. For example, gold, silver, platinum and copper are found in the
free state. Copper and silver are also found in the combined state as
their sulphide or oxide ores. The metals at the top of the activity series
(K, Na, Ca, Mg and Al) are so reactive that they are never found in
nature as free elements. The metals in the middle of the activity series
(Zn, Fe, Pb, etc.) are moderately reactive. They are found in the earth’s
crust mainly as oxides, sulphides or carbonates. You will find that
the ores of many metals are oxides. This is because oxygen is a very
reactive element and is very abundant on the earth.

Thus on the basis of reactivity, we can group the metals into the
following three categories (Fig. 3.9) — (i) Metals of low reactivity; (ii) Metals
of medium reactivity; (iii) Metals of high reactivity. Different techniques
are to be used for obtaining the metals falling in each category.

Several steps are involved in the extraction of pure metal from
ores. A summary of these steps is given in Fig.3.10. Each step is
explained in detail in the following sections.

Ore

+

Concentration of ore

Metals Metals of Metals of
of high medium low
reactivity reactivity reactivity
Electrolysis of Sulphide
molten ore ores
Carbonate Sulphide
ore ore |
Pure metal J | Roasting
Calcination Roasting J
| Metal
Oxide of metal |
Refining

Reduction to
metal

Purification of
metal

Figure 3.10 Steps involved in the extraction of metals from ores

3.4.2 Enrichment of Ores

Ores mined from the earth are usually contaminated with large amounts
of impurities such as soil, sand, etc., called gangue. The impurities must

be removed from the ore prior to the extraction of the metal. The processes

50

Science

Page_Number 50 ended
/n
Page_Number 51 started
used for removing the gangue from the ore are based on the differences
between the physical or chemical properties of the gangue and the ore.
Different separation techniques are accordingly employed.

3.4.3 Extracting Metals Low in the Activity Series

Metals low in the activity series are very unreactive. The oxides of these
metals can be reduced to metals by heating alone. For example, cinnabar
(HgS) is an ore of mercury. When it is heated in air, it is first converted
into mercuric oxide (HgO). Mercuric oxide is then reduced to mercury
on further heating.

Heat

2HgS(s) + 30, (g) ———— 2HgO(s) + 2SO, (g)

2HgO(s)—Heat 5 2H gl) + 0,(8)

Similarly, copper which is found as Cu,S in nature can be obtained
from its ore by just heating in air.

2Cu,S$ + 30,(g) 2" 5 2Cu,0[s) + 280, (g)

2Cu,0 + Cu,s Heat, 6culs) + SO, (9)

3.4.4 Extracting Metals in the Middle of the Activity Series

The metals in the middle of the activity series such as iron, zinc, lead,
copper, etc., are moderately reactive. These are usually present as
sulphides or carbonates in nature. It is easier to obtain a metal from its
oxide, as compared to its sulphides and carbonates. Therefore, prior to
reduction, the metal sulphides and carbonates must be converted into
metal oxides. The sulphide ores are converted into oxides by heating
strongly in the presence of excess air. This process is known as roasting.
The carbonate ores are changed into oxides by heating strongly in limited
air. This process is known as calcination. The chemical reaction that
takes place during roasting and calcination of zinc ores can be shown
as follows -

Roasting
2ZnS{s) + 30, (g) He" 5 27Zn0{s) + 2S0,(g)
Calcination

ZnCO,(s)—Heat_; zno{s) + CO, (g)

The metal oxides are then reduced to the corresponding metals by
using suitable reducing agents such as carbon. For example, when zinc
oxide is heated with carbon, it is reduced to metallic zinc.

ZnO{(s) + C(s) > Zn(s) + CO(g)

You are already familiar with the process of oxidation and reduction
explained in the first Chapter. Obtaining metals from their compounds
is also a reduction process.

Besides using carbon (coke) to reduce metal oxides to metals,
sometimes displacement reactions can also be used. The highly reactive
metals such as sodium, calcium, aluminium, etc., are used as reducing

Metals and Non-metals

51

Page_Number 51 ended
/n
Page_Number 52 started
agents because they can displace metals of lower reactivity from their
compounds. For example, when manganese dioxide is heated with
aluminium powder, the following reaction takes place -

3Mn0O,(s) + 4Al(s) > 3Mn(]) + 2A1,0,(s) + Heat
Can you identify the substances that are getting oxidised

and reduced?

These displacement reactions are highly exothermic. The
amount of heat evolved is so large that the metals are produced
in the molten state. In fact, the reaction of iron(II) oxide (Fe,O,)
with aluminium is used to join railway tracks or cracked
machine parts. This reaction is known as the thermit reaction.

Fe,0,(s) + 2Al(s) > 2Fe(l) + Al,O,(s) + Heat

3.4.5 Extracting Metals towards the Top of the
Activity Series

Figure 3.11
Thermit process for The metals high up in the reactivity series are very reactive. They cannot

Joining railway tracks be obtained from their compounds by heating with carbon. For example,

carbon cannot reduce the oxides of sodium, magnesium, calcium,
aluminium, etc., to the respective metals. This is because these metals
have more affinity for oxygen than carbon. These metals are obtained
by electrolytic reduction. For example, sodium, magnesium and calcium
are obtained by the electrolysis of their molten chlorides. The metals
are deposited at the cathode (the negatively charged electrode), whereas,
chlorine is liberated at the anode (the positively charged electrode). The
reactions are —

Atcathode Nat+e7 > Na
At anode 2Clr > Cl, + 2e7

Similarly, aluminium is obtained by the electrolytic reduction of

aluminium oxide.
Key _ +

e| —_

3.4.6 Refining of Metals

The metals produced by various reduction processes
Acidified described above are not very pure. They contain

Cathode f<—Anode

copper impurities, which must be removed to obtain pure metals.
pee sulphate The most widely used method for refining impure metals
cu is electrolytic refining.
‘Tank . . |
Impurities Electrolytic Refining: Many metals, such as copper, zinc,

(anode mud) tin, nickel, silver, gold, etc., are refined electrolytically. In
Figure 3.12 this process, the impure metal is made the anode anda
Electrolytic refining of copper. The thin strip of pure metal is made the cathode. A solution of
electrolyte is a solution ef acidified copper the metal salt is used as an electrolyte. The apparatus is
sulphate. The anode is impure copper, . . .
whereas, the cathode is a strip of pure set up as shown in Fig. 3.12. On passing the current
copper. On passing electric current, pure through the electrolyte, the pure metal from the anode

copper is deposited on the cathode. dissolves into the electrolyte. An equivalent amount of pure

52 Science

Page_Number 52 ended
/n
Page_Number 53 started
metal from the electrolyte is deposited on the cathode. The soluble
impurities go into the solution, whereas, the insoluble impurities settle
down at the bottom of the anode and are known as anode mud.

QUES TION §

Define the following terms.

(i) Mineral (ii) Ore (iii) Gangue

Name two metals which are found in nature in the free state.
What chemical process is used for obtaining a metal from its oxide?

3.5 CORROSION

You have learnt the following about corrosion in Chapter 1 -

= Silver articles become black after some time when exposed to air.
This is because it reacts with sulphur in the air to form a coating
of silver sulphide.

= Copper reacts with moist carbon dioxide in the air and slowly loses
its shiny brown surface and gains a green coat. This green
substance is copper carbonate.

= lron when exposed to moist air for a long time acquires a coating
of a brown flaky substance called rust.
Let us find out the conditions under which iron rusts. B c

A

Activity 3.14 |=) =

Take three test tubes and place clean iron nails
in each of them. +LAir Ar —DpDry
Label these test tubes A, B and C. Pour some air
water in test tube A and cork it. ar Layer
Pour boiled distilled water in test tube B, add lprevents|
about 1 mL of oil and cork it. The oil will float on air
water and prevent the air from dissolving in the Rusty pfiesolving|
water. hn water)
Put some anhydrous calcium chloride in ee
test tube C and cork it. Anhydrous calcium ah wy,
‘ater
chloride will absorb the moisture, if any, from

the air. Leave these test tubes for a few days and
then observe (Fig. 3.13).

Boiled distilled Anhydrous calcium
water (boiled to chloride

You will observe that iron nails rust in test tube A, deoteaey (drying agent)

but they do not rust in test tubes B and C. In the test .
tube A, the nails are exposed to both air and water. In Figure 3.13 . oo.
the test tube B, the nails are exposed to only water, and Investigating the conditions uncer which iron

€ a , P y a rusts. In tube A, both air and water are
the nails in test tube C are exposed to dry air. What present. In tube B, there is no air dissolved
does this tell us about the conditions under which iron in the water. In tube C, the air is dry.
articles rust?

Metals and Non-metals 53

Page_Number 53 ended
/n
Page_Number 54 started
Do You Know?

Tron pillar at Dethi

54

3.5.1 Prevention of Corrosion

The rusting of iron can be prevented by painting, oiling, greasing,
galvanising, chrome plating, anodising or making alloys.

Galvanisation is a method of protecting steel and iron from rusting
by coating them with a thin layer of zinc. The galvanised article is
protected against rusting even if the zinc coating is broken. Can you
reason this out?

Alloying is a very good method of improving the properties of a metal.
We can get the desired properties by this method. For example, iron is
the most widely used metal. But it is never used in its pure state. This is
because pure iron is very soft and stretches easily when hot. But, if itis
mixed with a small amount of carbon (about 0.05 %), it becomes hard
and strong. When iron is mixed with nickel and chromium, we get
stainless steel, which is hard and does not rust. Thus, if iron is mixed
with some other substance, its properties change. In fact, the properties
of any metal can be changed if it is mixed with some other substance.
The substance added may be a metal or a non-metal. An alloy is a
homogeneous mixture of two or more metals, or a metal and a non-
metal. It is prepared by first melting the primary metal, and then,
dissolving the other elements in it in definite proportions. It is then cooled
to room temperature.

Pure gold, known as 24 carat gold, is very soft. It is, therefore, not suitable for making

jewellery. It is alloyed with either silver or copper to make it hard. Generally, in India,
22 carat gold is used for making ornaments. It means that 22 parts of pure gold is
alloyed with 2 parts of either copper or silver.

If one of the metals is mercury, then the alloy is known as an
amalgam. The electrical conductivity and melting point of an alloy is
less than that of pure metals. For example, brass, an alloy of copper and
zinc (Cu and Zn), and bronze, an alloy of copper and tin (Cu and Sn), are
not good conductors of electricity whereas copper is used for making
electrical circuits. Solder, an alloy of lead and tin (Pb and Sn), has a low
melting point and is used for welding electrical wires together.

The iron pillar near the Qutub Minar in Delhi was made around
400 BC by the iron workers of India. They had developed a
process which prevented wrought iron from rusting. This is

likely because of formation of a thin film of magnetic oxide
(Fe,O,,) on the surface, as a result of finishing treatment given
to the pillar, painting it with a mixture of different salts, then
heating and quenching. The iron pillar is 8 m high and weighs
6 tonnes (6000 kg).

More to Know!

Science

Page_Number 54 ended
/n
Page_Number 55 started
Metallic oxides of zinc, magnesium and copper were heated with the
following metals.

a

Zinc oxide
Magnesium oxide

Copper oxide

In which cases will you find displacement reactions taking place?
Which metals do not corrode easily?

What are alloys?

= Elements can be classified as metals and non-metals.

: Metals are lustrous, malleable, ductile and are good conductors of heat and
electricity. They are solids at room temperature, except mercury which is a liquid.

= Metals can form positive ions by losing electrons to non-metals.

= Metals combine with oxygen to form basic oxides. Aluminium oxide and zinc oxide
show the properties of both basic as well as acidic oxides. These oxides are known
as amphoteric oxides.

= Different metals have different reactivities with water and dilute acids.

=  Alist of common metals arranged in order of their decreasing reactivity is known
as an activity series.

= Metals above hydrogen in the Activity series can displace hydrogen from dilute
acids.

= Amore reactive metal displaces a less reactive metal from its salt solution.

= Metals occur in nature as free elements or in the form of their compounds.

= The extraction of metals from their ores and then refining them for use is known
as metallurgy.

= An alloy is a homogeneous mixture of two or more metals, or a metal and a
non-metal.

=a The surface of some metals, such as iron, is corroded when they are exposed to
moist air for a long period of time. This phenomenon is known as corrosion.

= Non-metals have properties opposite to that of metals. They are neither malleable
nor ductile. They are bad conductors of heat and electricity, except for graphite,
which conducts electricity.

Metals and Non-metals 55

Page_Number 55 ended
/n
Page_Number 56 started
56

Non-metals form negatively charged ions by gaining electrons when reacting with
metals.

Non-metals form oxides which are either acidic or neutral.

Non-metals do not displace hydrogen from dilute acids. They react with hydrogen
to form hydrides.

Which of the following pairs will give displacement reactions?
(a) NaCl solution and copper metal

(b) MgCl, solution and aluminium metal

(c) FeSO, solution and silver metal

(d) AgNO, solution and copper metal.

Which of the following methods is suitable for preventing an iron frying pan from
rusting?

(a) Applying grease

(b) Applying paint

(c) Applying a coating of zinc

(d) All of the above.

An element reacts with oxygen to give a compound with a high melting point. This
compound is also soluble in water. The element is likely to be

(a) calcium

(b) carbon

(c) _ silicon

(d) iron.

Food cans are coated with tin and not with zinc because

(a) zinc is costlier than tin.

(b) zinc has a higher melting point than tin.

(c) inc is more reactive than tin.

(d) zinc is less reactive than tin.

You are given a hammer, a battery, a bulb, wires and a switch.

(a) How could you use them to distinguish between samples of metals and
non-metals?

(b) Assess the usefulness of these tests in distinguishing between metals and
non-metals.

What are amphoteric oxides? Give two examples of amphoteric oxides.

Name two metals which will displace hydrogen from dilute acids, and two metals
which will not.

Science

Page_Number 56 ended
/n
Page_Number 57 started
In the electrolytic refining of a metal M, what would you take as the anode, the
cathode and the electrolyte?

Pratyush took sulphur powder on a spatula and heated it. He collected the gas
evolved by inverting a test tube over it, as shown in figure below.

(a) What will be the action of gas on
(i) dry litmus paper?
(ii) moist litmus paper?

(b) Write a balanced chemical
equation for the reaction
taking place.

State two ways to prevent the

rusting of iron. Test tube

. What type of oxides are formed when

non-metals combine with oxygen?

Give reasons Spatula containing

(a) Platinum, gold and silver are GH PRES
used to make jewellery.

(b) Sodium, potassium and
lithium are stored under oil.

(c) Aluminium is a highly reactive
metal, yet it is used to make
utensils for cooking.
Carbonate and sulphide ores
are usually converted into Clelllaeiomeli gas
oxides during the process of
extraction.

. You must have seen tarnished copper vessels being cleaned with lemon or tamarind
juice. Explain why these sour substances are effective in cleaning the vessels.

Differentiate between metal and non-metal on the basis of their chemical properties.

. Aman went door to door posing as a goldsmith. He promised to bring back the
glitter of old and dull gold ornaments. An unsuspecting lady gave a set of gold
bangles to him which he dipped in a particular solution. The bangles sparkled
like new but their weight was reduced drastically. The lady was upset but after a
futile argument the man beat a hasty retreat. Can you play the detective to find
out the nature of the solution he had used?

Give reasons why copper is used to make hot water tanks and not steel (an alloy
of iron).

Metals and Non-metals Si

Page_Number 57 ended
/n
Page_Number 58 started
Activity 4.1

CHAPTER
j e
44}, Carbon and its

t4* Compounds

n the last Chapter, we came to know many compounds of importance

to us. In this Chapter we will be studying about some more interesting
compounds and their properties. Also we shall be learning about carbon,
an element which is of immense significance to us in both its elemental
form and in the combined form.

Things made | Things made
of metal of glass/clay

Make a list of ten things you have
used or consumed since the morning.
Compile this list with the lists made
by your classmates and then sort the
items into the following Table.

If there are items which are made up
of more than one material, put them
into both the relevant columns.

Look at the items that come in the last column - your teacher will be
able to tell you that most of them are made up of compounds of carbon.
Can you think of a method to test this? What would be the product ifa
compound containing carbon is burnt? Do you know of any test to
confirm this?

Food, clothes, medicines, books, or many of the things that you listed
are all based on this versatile element carbon. In addition, all living
structures are carbon based. The amount of carbon present in the earth’s
crust and in the atmosphere is quite meagre. The earth’s crust has only
0.02% carbon in the form of minerals (like carbonates, hydrogen-
carbonates, coal and petroleum) and the atmosphere has 0.03% of carbon
dioxide. In spite of this small amount of carbon available in nature, the
importance of carbon seems to be immense. In this Chapter, we will be
looking at the properties of carbon which lead to this anomaly.

4.1 BONDING IN CARBON — THE COVALENT BOND

In the previous Chapter, we have studied the properties of ionic
compounds. We saw that ionic compounds have high melting and boiling
points and conduct electricity in solution or in the molten state. We also

Page_Number 58 ended
/n
Page_Number 59 started
saw how the nature of bonding in ionic compounds explains these
properties. Let us now study the properties of some carbon compounds.
Melting and boiling points of some carbon compounds are given in
Table 4.1.
Most carbon compounds are poor Table 4.1 Melting points and boiling points of some

conductors of electricity as we have seen compounds of carbon

in Chapter 2. From the data on the

boiling and melting points of the above
compounds, we can conclude that the point (K) | point (K)
forces of attraction between these Acetic acid (CH,COOH) 290 391

molecules are not very strong. Since
these compounds are largely non-
conductors of electricity, we can conclude Ethanol (CH,CH,OH) 156 351
that the bonding in these compounds
does not give rise to any ions.

In Class IX, we learnt about the
combining capacity of various elements and how it depends on the
number of valence electrons. Let us now look at the electronic
configuration of carbon. The atomic number of carbon is 6. What would
be the distribution of electrons in various shells for carbon? How many
valence electrons will carbon have?

We know that the reactivity of elements is explained as their tendency
to attain a completely filled outer shell, that is, attain noble gas
configuration. Elements forming ionic compounds achieve this by either
gaining or losing electrons from the outermost shell. In the case of carbon,
it has four electrons in its outermost shell and needs to gain or lose four
electrons to attain noble gas configuration. If it were to gain or lose
electrons —

Chloroform (CHCI,) 209 334

Methane (CH,) 90 lll

@ It could gain four electrons forming C* anion. But it would be difficult
for the nucleus with six protons to hold on to ten electrons, that is,
four extra electrons.

(ii) It could lose four electrons forming C* cation. But it would require
a large amount of energy to remove four electrons leaving behind a
carbon cation with six protons in its nucleus holding on to just two
electrons.

Carbon overcomes this problem by sharing its valence electrons with
other atoms of carbon or with atoms of other elements. Not just carbon,
but many other elements form molecules by sharing electrons in this
manner. The shared electrons ‘belong’ to the outer shells of both the
atoms and lead to both atoms attaining the noble gas configuration.
Before going on to compounds of carbon, let us look at some simple
molecules formed by the sharing of valence electrons.

The simplest molecule formed in this manner is that of hydrogen.
As you have learnt earlier, the atomic number of hydrogen is 1. Hence
hydrogen has one electron in its K shell and it requires one more electron
to fill the K shell. So two hydrogen atoms share their electrons to forma
molecule of hydrogen, H,. This allows each hydrogen atom to attain the

Carbon and its Compounds Sie)

Page_Number 59 ended
/n
Page_Number 60 started
Figure 4.1
A molecule of hydrogen

Figure 4.2
Single bond between
two hydrogen atoms

XX xX
x
Ox
XX xX
Oo=0
Figure 4.3

Double bond between
two oxygen atoms

x

x
Nx
x x

N

N

Figure 4.4
Triple bond between
two nitrogen atoms

60

XO Oxygen atoms

x x
XN x Nitrogen atoms
x x

electronic configuration of the nearest noble gas,
helium, which has two electrons in its K shell. We can
depict this using dots or crosses to represent valence
electrons (Fig. 4.1).

The shared pair of electrons is said to constitute a
single bond between the two hydrogen atoms. A single
bond is also represented by a line between the two
atoms, as shown in Fig. 4.2.

The atomic number of chlorine is 17. What would be its electronic
configuration and its valency? Chlorine forms a diatomic molecule, Cl,.
Can you draw the electron dot structure for this molecule? Note that
only the valence shell electrons need to be depicted.

In the case of oxygen, we see the formation of a double bond between
two oxygen atoms. This is because an atom of oxygen has six electrons
in its L shell (the atomic number of oxygen is eight) and it requires two
more electrons to complete its octet. So each atom of oxygen shares two
electrons with another atom of oxygen to give us the structure shown in
Fig. 4.3. The two electrons contributed by each oxygen atom give rise to
two shared pairs of electrons. This is said to constitute a double bond
between the two atoms.

Can you now depict a molecule of water showing the nature
of bonding between one oxygen atom and two hydrogen
atoms? Does the molecule have single bonds or double bonds?

What would happen in the case ofa diatomic molecule of
nitrogen? Nitrogen has the atomic number 7. What would be
its electronic configuration and its combining capacity? In
order to attain an octet, each nitrogen atom in a molecule of
nitrogen contributes three electrons giving rise to three shared
pairs of electrons. This is said to constitute a triple bond
between the two atoms. The electron dot structure of N, and
its triple bond can be depicted as in Fig. 4.4.

A molecule of ammonia has the formula NH,. Can you draw
the electron dot structure for this molecule showing how all
four atoms achieve noble gas configuration? Will the molecule
have single, double or triple bonds?

Let us now take a look at methane, which is a compound
of carbon. Methane is widely used as a fuel and is a major
component of bio-gas and Compressed Natural Gas (CNG). It
is also one of the simplest compounds formed by carbon.
Methane has a formula CH,. Hydrogen, as you know, has a
valency of 1. Carbon is tetravalent because it has four valence
electrons. In order to achieve noble gas configuration, carbon
shares these electrons with four atoms of hydrogen as shown
in Fig. 4.5.

Such bonds which are formed by the sharing of an electron pair
between two atoms are known as covalent bonds. Covalently bonded
molecules are seen to have strong bonds within the molecule, but inter-
molecular forces are small. This gives rise to the low melting and boiling

O, molecule

N, molecule

Science

Page_Number 60 ended
/n
Page_Number 61 started
points of these compounds. Since the electrons are shared between
atoms and no charged particles are formed, such covalent compounds (4)

are generally poor conductors of electricity. c)

Allotropes of carbon
The element carbon occurs in different forms in nature with
widely varying physical properties. Both diamond and
graphite are formed by carbon atoms, the difference lies in
the manner in which the carbon atoms are bonded to one

. . Figure 4.5
another. In diamond, each carbon atom is bonded to four Electron dot structure for
other carbon atoms forming a rigid three-dimensional methane

structure. In graphite, each carbon atom is bonded to three
other carbon atoms in the same plane giving a hexagonal array.
One of these bonds is a double-bond, and thus the valency of
carbon is satisfied. Graphite structure is formed by the
hexagonal arrays being placed in layers one above the other.

The sien of diamond The structure of C-60
Buckminsterfullerene

The structure of graphite

More to Know!

These two different structures result in diamond and graphite having very different
physical properties even though their chemical properties are the same. Diamond is
the hardest substance known while graphite is smooth and slippery. Graphite is also
avery good conductor of electricity unlike other non-metals that you studied in the
previous Chapter.

Diamonds can be synthesised by subjecting pure carbon to very high pressure and
temperature. These synthetic diamonds are small but are otherwise indistinguishable
from natural diamonds.

Fullerenes form another class of carbon allotropes. The first one to be identified was
C-60 which has carbon atoms arranged in the shape of a football. Since this looked
like the geodesic dome designed by the US architect Buckminster Fuller, the molecule
was named fullerene.

QUESTIONS

What would be the electron dot structure of carbon dioxide which has

the formula CO,?

What would be the electron dot structure of a molecule of sulphur which
is made up of eight atoms of sulphur? (Hint - The cight atoms of sulphur
are joined together in the form of a ring.)

Carbon and its Compounds 61

Page_Number 61 ended
/n
Page_Number 62 started
62

4.2 VERSATILE NATURE OF CARBON

We have seen the formation of covalent bonds by the sharing of
electrons in various elements and compounds. We have also seen the
structure of a simple carbon compound, methane. In the beginning
of the Chapter, we saw how many things we use contain carbon. In
fact, we ourselves are made up of carbon compounds. The numbers
of carbon compounds whose formulae are known to chemists was
recently estimated to be about three million! This outnumbers by a
large margin the compounds formed by all the other elements put
together. Why is it that this property is seen in carbon and no other
element? The nature of the covalent bond enables carbon to form a
large number of compounds. Two factors noticed in the case of
carbon are -

(i) Carbon has the unique ability to form bonds with other atoms of
carbon, giving rise to large molecules. This property is called
catenation. These compounds may have long chains of carbon,
branched chains of carbon or even carbon atoms arranged in rings.
In addition, carbon atoms may be linked by single, double or triple
bonds. Compounds of carbon, which are linked by only single
bonds between the carbon atoms are called saturated compounds.
Compounds of carbon having double or triple bonds between their
carbon atoms are called unsaturated compounds.

No other element exhibits the property of catenation to the extent
seen in carbon compounds. Silicon forms compounds with
hydrogen which have chains of upto seven or eight atoms, but these
compounds are very reactive. The carbon-carbon bond is very strong
and hence stable. This gives us the large number of compounds
with many carbon atoms linked to each other.

(ii) Since carbon has a valency of four, it is capable of bonding with

four other atoms of carbon or atoms of some other mono-valent
element. Compounds of carbon are formed with oxygen, hydrogen,
nitrogen, sulphur, chlorine and many other elements giving rise to
compounds with specific properties which depend on the elements
other than carbon present in the molecule.
Again the bonds that carbon forms with most other elements are
very strong making these compounds exceptionally stable. One
reason for the formation of strong bonds by carbon is its small size.
This enables the nucleus to hold on to the shared pairs of electrons
strongly. The bonds formed by elements having larger atoms are
much weaker.

Science

Page_Number 62 ended
/n
Page_Number 63 started
Organic compounds
The two characteristic features seen in carbon, that is, tetravalency and catenation, put
together give rise to a large number of compounds. Many have the same non-carbon
atom or group of atoms attached to different carbon chains. These compounds were

initially extracted from natural substances and it was thought that these carbon
compounds or organic compounds could only be formed within a living system. That is,
it was postulated that a ‘vital force’ was necessary for their synthesis. Friedrich Wéhler
disproved this in 1828 by preparing urea from ammonium cyanate. But carbon
compounds, except for oxides of carbon, carbonate and hydrogencarbonate salts continue
to be studied under organic chemistry.

More to Know!

4.2.1 Saturated and Unsaturated Carbon Compounds

We have already seen the structure of methane. Another compound
formed between carbon and hydrogen is ethane with a formula of C,H,.
In order to arrive at the structure of simple carbon
compounds, the first step is to link the carbon atoms
together with a single bond (Fig. 4.6a) and then use the
hydrogen atoms to satisfy the remaining valencies of carbon
(Fig. 4.6b). For example, the structure of ethane is arrived
in the following steps —

Cc—C Step 1
Figure 4.6 (a) Carbon atoms linked together with a single bond

Three valencies of each carbon atom remain unsatisfied,

so each is bonded to three hydrogen atoms giving: Figure 4.6
(c) Electron dot structure of
H H ethane
H-¢ “¢ -H Step 2
HH

Figure 4.6 (b) Each carbon atom bonded to three hydrogen atoms
The electron dot structure of ethane is shown in Fig. 4.6(c).

Can you draw the structure of propane, which has the molecular Cc—C Step 1
formula C,H, in a similar manner? You will see that the valencies of all
the atoms are satisfied by single bonds between them. Such carbon
compounds are called saturated compounds. These compounds are H H
normally not very reactive. \

However, another compound of carbon and hydrogen has the formula - ~e
C,H, and is called ethene. How can this molecule be depicted? We follow H Step 2
the same step-wise approach as above.

Each carbon atom gets two hydrogen atoms to give -

H H
We see that one valency per carbon atom remains unsatisfied. This \ cH co”
can be satisfied only if there is a double bond between the two carbons J NX Steps
giving us — H H

Carbon and its Compounds 63

Page_Number 63 ended
/n
Page_Number 64 started
Figure 4.7
Structure of ethene

The electron dot structure for ethene is given in Fig. 4.7.
Yet another compound of hydrogen and carbon has the formula
C,H, and is called ethyne. Can you draw the electron dot
structure for ethyne? How many bonds are necessary between
the two carbon atoms in order to satisfy their valencies? Such
compounds of carbon having double or triple bonds between
the carbon atoms are known as unsaturated carbon compounds
and they are more reactive than the saturated carbon
compounds.

4.2.2 Chains, Branches and Rings

In the earlier section, we mentioned the carbon compounds methane,
ethane and propane, containing respectively 1, 2 and 3 carbon atoms.
Such ‘chains’ of carbon atoms can contain tens of carbon atoms. The
names and structures of six of these are given in Table 4.2.

Table 4.2 Formulae and structures of saturated compounds of carbon and hydrogen

64

Methane CH, BEG -H
H
HY
Ethane C.H, Ho¢ re -H
HH
an
Propane C,H, RRC=C-C—nl
HHH
eee
Butane C,H, HeCsCSC5 Cai
HHH H
Ba OH
Pentane C.H,, HeC SC = CSCC SH
H HH H H
oO OW OR
Hexane C.H,, RIG -C-C-C-C Co

Science

Page_Number 64 ended
/n
Page_Number 65 started
But, let us take another look at butane. If we make the carbon
‘skeleton’ with four carbon atoms, we see that two different ‘skeletons’
are possible —

XE

C—C—C—C c an

Figure 4.8 (a) Two possible carbon-skeletons

Filling the remaining valencies with hydrogen gives us —

HHH H Hooch
Lot of Aap’ OH
BEE--O-H We ok
HHH H HH ut

Figure 4.8 (b) Complete molecules for two structures with formula C,H,,

We see that both these structures have the same formula C,H,,. Such
compounds with identical molecular formula but different structures
are called structural isomers.

In addition to straight and branched carbon chains, some compounds
have carbon atoms arranged in the form ofa ring. For example, cyclohexane
has the formula C,H,, and the following structure —

H HH H
\7 \ 7
— \ a7 \ AZ
7 \ Cc Cc.
Cc pe 7 \ JN
_ \ 7
H HH H
@ 2)

Figure 4.9 Structure of cyclohexane (a) carbon skeleton (b) complete molecule

Can you draw the electron dot structure for cyclohexane? Straight
chain, branched chain and cyclic carbon compounds, all may be saturated
or unsaturated. For example, benzene, C,H, has the following structure -

Il
c a Benzene — C,H,

Figure 4.10 Structure of benzene
All these carbon compounds which contain just carbon and hydrogen
are called hydrocarbons. Among these, the saturated hydrocarbons are
called alkanes. The unsaturated hydrocarbons which contain one or
more double bonds are called alkenes. Those containing one or more
triple bonds are called alkynes.

4.2.3 Will you be my Friend?

Carbon seems to be a very friendly element. So far we have been looking
at compounds of carbon and hydrogen. But carbon also forms bonds

Carbon and its Compounds

65

Page_Number 65 ended
/n
Page_Number 66 started
with other elements such as halogens, oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur. In
a hydrocarbon chain, one or more hydrogens can be replaced by these
elements, such that the valency of carbon remains satisfied. In such
compounds, the element replacing hydrogen is referred to as a

heteroatom. These

Table 4.3 Some functional groups in carbon compounds heteroatoms confer

specific properties to the
Hetero Functional Formula of compound, regardless
of the carbon chain and

66

Cl/Br

Oxygen

Halo- (Chloro/bromo) —Cl, —Br hence are called
(substitutes for functional groups.
hydrogen atom) Some important

functional groups are

1, Alcohol —OH given in the Table 4.3.

H Free valency = or

7 valencies of the group

2. Aldehyde =e are shown by the single
© line. The functional

-C- group is attached to the

3. Ketone l carbon chain through
9 this valency by

fe) replacing one hydrogen

4. Carboxylic acid _ fom OH atom or atoms.

4.2.4 Homologous Series

You have seen that carbon atoms can be linked together to form chains
of varying lengths. In addition, hydrogen atom or atoms on these carbon
chains can be replaced by any of the functional groups that we saw
above. The presence of a functional group such as alcohol dictates the
properties of the carbon compound, regardless of the length of the carbon
chain. For example, the chemical properties of CH,OH, C,H,OH, C,H,OH
and C HyOH are all very similar. Hence, such a series of compounds in
which the same functional group substitutes for hydrogen in a carbon
chain is called a homologous series.

Let us look at the homologous series that we saw earlier in Table
4.2. If we look at the formulae of successive compounds, say —

CH, and C,H, — these differ by a-CH,- unit
C,H, and C,H, — these differ by a-CH,- unit

What is the difference between the next pair— propane and butane (C,H,,)?

Can you find out the difference in molecular masses between these
pairs (the atomic mass of carbon is 12 u and the atomic mass of hydrogen
is 1 uj)?

Similarly, take the homologous series for alkenes. The first member
of the series is ethene which we have already come across in
Section 4.2.1. What is the formula for ethene? The succeeding members
have the formula C,H,, C,H, and C,H,,. Do these also differ by a-CH,-

Science

Page_Number 66 ended
/n
Page_Number 67 started
unit? Do you see any relation between the number of carbon and
hydrogen atoms in these compounds? The general formula for alkenes
can be written as C,H,,, where n= 2, 3, 4. Can you similarly generate the
general formula for alkanes and alkynes?

As the molecular mass increases in any homologous series, a
gradation in physical properties is seen. This is because the melting
points and boiling points increase with increasing molecular mass. Other
physical properties such as solubility in a particular solvent also show
a similar gradation. But the chemical properties, which are determined
solely by the functional group, remain similar in a homologous series.

Activity 4.2

Calculate the difference in the formulae and molecular masses
for (a) CH,OH and C,H.OH (b) C,H,OH and C,H,OH, and (c) C,H,OH
and C,H,OH.

Is there any similarity in these three?

Arrange these alcohols in the order of increasing carbon atoms to
get a family. Can we call this family a homologous series?
Generate the homologous series for compounds containing up to
four carbons for the other functional groups given in Table 4.3.

4.2.5 Nomenclature of Carbon Compounds

The names of compounds in a homologous series are based on the name
of the basic carbon chain modified by a “prefix” “phrase before” or “suffix”
“phrase after” indicating the nature of the functional group. For example,
the names of the alcohols taken in Activity 4.2 are methanol, ethanol,
propanol and butanol.

Naming a carbon compound can be done by the following method —

(i) Identify the number of carbon atoms in the compound. A
compound having three carbon atoms would have the name
propane.

(ii) In case a functional group is present, it is indicated in the
name of the compound with either a prefix or a suffix (as given
in Table 4.4).

(iii) If the name of the functional group is to be given as a suffix, the
name of the carbon chain is modified by deleting the final ‘e’ and
adding the appropriate suffix. For example, a three-carbon chain
with a ketone group would be named in the following manner —
Propane — ‘e’ = propan + ‘one’ = propanone.

(iv) Ifthe carbon chain is unsaturated, then the final ‘ane’ in the name
of the carbon chain is substituted by ‘ene’ or ‘yne’ as given in
Table 4.4. For example, a three-carbon chain with a double bond
would be called propene and if it has a triple bond, it would be
called propyne.

Carbon and its Compounds

67

Page_Number 67 ended
/n
Page_Number 68 started
Table 4.4 Nomenclature of functional groups

Functional Prefix/Suffix Example
group
aant
1. Halogen Prefix-chloro, BECHC—O-O) Chloropropane
bromo, etc. HHH
ane
IEC —© =C -Br_ Bromopropane
HHH
ang
2. Alcohol Suffix - ol BIC HCC Ole Propanol
HHH
pay
3. Aldehyde Suffix - al REC —C- C=O) Propanal
HH
aa
4. Ketone Suffix - one BIRO CC Propanone
HOH
aan
5. Carboxylic acid Suffix - oic acid BEC CCl Propanoic acid
HH
H H
i 1
6. Double bond (alkenes) Suffix - ene BEC =C= Ca Propene
H H
i
7. Triple bond (alkynes) Suffix - yne BEC-C=C 8 Propyne
H

1. How many structural isomers can you draw for pentane?

2. What are the two properties of carbon which lead to the huge number
of carbon compounds we see around us?

3. What will be the formula and electron dot structure of cyclopentane?

68 Science

Page_Number 68 ended
/n
Page_Number 69 started
4, Draw the structures for the following compounds.
(i) Ethanoic acid (ii) Bromopentane*
(iii) Butanone (iv) Hexanal.

*Are structural isomers possible for bromopentane?

o

How would you name the following compounds?

(i) CH, —Br (ii) H-C=0

4.3 CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF CARBON COMPOUNDS

In this section we will be studying about some of the chemical properties
of carbon compounds. Since most of the fuels we use are either carbon
or its compounds, we shall first study combustion.

4.3.1 Combustion

Carbon, in all its allotropic forms, burns in oxygen to give carbon dioxide
along with the release of heat and light. Most carbon compounds also
release a large amount of heat and light on burning. These are the
oxidation reactions that you learnt about in the first Chapter —

() C+0O, CO, + heat and light
(ii) CH,+ 0, > CO, +H,0 + heat and light
(iii) CH,CH,OH + O, > CO, + H,O + heat and light

Balance the latter two reactions like you learnt in the first Chapter.

Activity 4.3 Activity 4.4
CAUTION: This Activity needs the teacher's assistance. Light a bunsen burner and
Take some carbon compounds (naphthalene, adjust the air hole at the
camphor, alcohol) one by one on a spatula and burn base to get different types of
them. flames/presence of smoke.
Observe the nature of the flame and note whether When do you get a yellow,
smoke is produced. sooty flame?

Place a metal plate above the flame. Is there a deposition flame?
on the plate in case of any of the compounds? °

Saturated hydrocarbons will generally give a clean flame while
unsaturated carbon compounds will give a yellow flame with lots of
black smoke. This results in a sooty deposit on the metal plate in Activity
4.3. However, limiting the supply of air results in incomplete combustion
of even saturated hydrocarbons giving a sooty flame. The gas/ kerosene
stove used at home has inlets for air so that a sufficiently oxygen-rich

Carbon and its Compounds

When do you get a blue

69

Page_Number 69 ended
/n
Page_Number 70 started
Do You Know?

More to Know!

mixture is burnt to give a clean blue flame. If you observe the bottoms of
cooking vessels getting blackened, it means that the air holes are blocked
and fuel is getting wasted. Fuels such as coal and petroleum have some
amount of nitrogen and sulphur in them. Their combustion results in
the formation of oxides of sulphur and nitrogen which are major
pollutants in the environment.

Why do substances burn with or without a flame?

Have you ever observed either a coal or a wood fire? If not, the next time you get a
chance, take close note of what happens when the wood or coal starts to burn. You
have seen above that a candle or the LPG in the gas stove burns with a flame. However,
you will observe the coal or charcoal in an ‘angithi’ sometimes just glows red and
gives out heat without a flame. This is because a flame is only produced when gaseous
substances burn. When wood or charcoal is ignited, the volatile substances present
vapourise and burn with a flame in the beginning.

A luminous flame is seen when the atoms of the gaseous substance are heated and
start to glow. The colour produced by each element is a characteristic property of
that element. Try and heat a copper wire in the flame of a gas stove and observe its
colour. You have seen that incomplete combustion gives soot which is carbon. On
this basis, what will you attribute the yellow colour of a candle flame to?

yb a (
Formation of coal and pet:

Coal and petroleum have been formed from biomass which has been subjected to
various biological and geological processes. Coal is the remains of trees, ferns, and
other plants that lived millions of years ago. These were crushed into the earth,
perhaps by earthquakes or volcanic eruptions. They were pressed down by layers of
earth and rock. They slowly decayed into coal. Oil and gas are the remains of millions
of tiny plants and animals that lived in the sea. When they died, their bodies sank to
the sea bed and were covered by silt. Bacteria attacked the dead remains, turning
them into oil and gas under the high pressures they were being subjected to.
Meanwhile, the silt was slowly compressed into rock. The oil and gas seeped into the
porous parts of the rock, and got trapped like water in a sponge. Can you guess why
coal and petroleum are called fossil fuels?

4.3.2 Oxidation

Activity 4.5 You have learnt

about oxidation reactions in
Take about 3 mL of ethanol in a test tube and warm it the first Chapter. Carbon
gently in a water bath. compounds can be easily
Add a 5% solution of alkaline potassium permanganate oxidised on combustion. In
drop by drop to this solution. addition to this complete
Does the colour of potassium permanganate persist when oxidation, we have reactions

it is added initially?
Why does the colour of potassium permanganate not
disappear when excess is added?

in which alcohols are
converted to carboxylic
acids —

70 Science

Page_Number 70 ended
/n
Page_Number 71 started
Alkaline KMnO, + Heat
CH,—CH,OH Or acidified K,Cr,O, + Heat CH,COOH
We see that some substances are capable of adding oxygen to others.
These substances are known as oxidising agents.
Alkaline potassium permanganate or acidified potassium dichromate
are oxidising alcohols to acids, that is, adding oxygen to the starting
material. Hence they are known as oxidising agents.

4.3.3 Addition Reaction

Unsaturated hydrocarbons add hydrogen in the presence of catalysts
such as palladium or nickel to give saturated hydrocarbons. Catalysts
are substances that cause a reaction to occur or proceed at a different
rate without the reaction itself being affected. This reaction is commonly
used in the hydrogenation of vegetable oils using a nickel catalyst.
VegeTable oils generally have long unsaturated carbon chains while
animal fats have saturated carbon chains.

R R_ Nickel catal ant

\e=07 lickel catalyst, R-C_C-_R

R’ \R H, ? an
RR

You must have seen advertisements stating that some vegetable oils
are ‘healthy’. Animal fats generally contain saturated fatty acids which
are said to be harmful for health. Oils containing unsaturated fatty acids
should be chosen for cooking.

4.3.4 Substitution Reaction

Saturated hydrocarbons are fairly unreactive and are inert in the presence
of most reagents. However, in the presence of sunlight, chlorine is added
to hydrocarbons in a very fast reaction. Chlorine can replace the hydrogen
atoms one by one. It is called a substitution reaction because one type
of atom or a group of atoms takes the place of another. A number of
products are usually formed with the higher homologues of alkanes.

CH, + Cl, > CH,Cl + HCl (in the presence of sunlight)

QUESTION S

Why is the conversion of ethanol to ethanoic acid an oxidation reaction?

A mixture of oxygen and ethyne is burnt for welding. Can you tell why
a mixture of ethyne and air is not used?

4.4 SOME IMPORTANT CARBON COMPOUNDS — ETHANOL
AND ETHANOIC ACID

Many carbon compounds are invaluable to us. But here we shall study
the properties of two commercially important compounds - ethanol and
ethanoic acid.

Carbon and its Compounds 71

Page_Number 71 ended
/n
Page_Number 72 started
Do You Know?

4.4.1 Properties of Ethanol

Ethanol is a liquid at room temperature (refer to Table 4.1 for the melting
and boiling points of ethanol). Ethanol is commonly called alcohol and
is the active ingredient of all alcoholic drinks. In addition, because itis a
good solvent, it is also used in medicines such as tincture iodine, cough
syrups, and many tonics. Ethanol is also soluble in water in all
proportions. Consumption of small quantities of dilute ethanol causes
drunkenness. Even though this practice is condemned, it is a socially
widespread practice. However, intake of even a small quantity of pure
ethanol (called absolute alcohol) can be lethal. Also, long-term
consumption of alcohol leads to many health problems.

Reactions of Ethanol

(i) Reaction with sodium —

Activity a5 2Na + 2CH,CH,OH — 2CH,CH,O Na* + H,
Teacher’s demonstration — (Sodium ethoxide)
Drop a small piece of sodium,

: Alcohols react with sodium leading to the
about the size of a couple of

mais of mee, imi ethan! evolution of hydrogen. With ethanol, the other
(absolute alcohol). product is sodium ethoxide. Can you recall which
What do you observe? other substances produce hydrogen on reacting with
How will you test the gas evolved? metals?

(ii) Reaction to give unsaturated hydrocarbon: Heating ethanol at
443 K with excess concentrated sulphuric acid results in the
dehydration of ethanol to give ethene —

Hot conc.

CH;—CH,OH —yr-gg,-— CH, = CH, +H,0

The concentrated sulphuric acid can be regarded as a dehydrating
agent which removes water from ethanol.

How do alcohols affect living beings?

When large quantities of ethanol are consumed, it tends to slow metabolic processes
and to depress the central nervous system. This results in lack of coordination,
mental confusion, drowsiness, lowering of the normal inhibitions, and finally stupour.
The individual may feel relaxed but does not realise that his sense of judgement,
sense of timing, and muscular coordination have been seriously impaired.

Unlike ethanol, intake of methanol in very small quantities can cause death. Methanol
is oxidised to methanal in the liver. Methanal reacts rapidly with the components of
cells. It causes the protoplasm to get coagulated, in much the same way an egg is
coagulated by cooking. Methanol also affects the optic nerve, causing blindness.
Ethanol is an important industrial solvent. To prevent the misuse of ethanol produced
for industrial use, it is made unfit for drinking by adding poisonous substances
like methanol to it. Dyes are also added to colour the alcohol blue so that it can be
identified easily. This is called denatured alcohol.

72 Science

Page_Number 72 ended
/n
Page_Number 73 started
Alcohol as a fuel

Sugarcane plants are one of the most efficient convertors of sunlight into chemical
energy. Sugarcane juice can be used to prepare molasses which is fermented to give
alcohol (ethanol). Some countries now use alcohol as an additive in petrol since itis a
cleaner fuel which gives rise to only carbon dioxide and water on burning in sufficient

air (oxygen).

More to Know!

4.4.2 Properties of Ethanoic Acid

Ethanoic acid is commonly called acetic acid and
belongs to a group of acids called carboxylic
acids. 5-8% solution of acetic acid in water is
called vinegar and is used widely as a preservative
in pickles. The melting point of pure ethanoic acid
is 290 K and hence it often freezes during winter
in cold climates. This gave rise to its name glacial
acetic acid.

The group of organic compounds called
carboxylic acids are obviously characterised by a

Activity 4.7

Compare the pH of dilute acetic acid
and dilute hydrochloric acid using
both litmus paper and universal
indicator.

Are both acids indicated by the
litmus test?

Does the universal indicator show
them as equally strong acids?

special acidity. However, unlike mineral acids like
HCl, which are completely ionised, carboxylic
acids are weak acids.

Activity 4.8 ‘Test tube
containing
Take 1 mL ethanol (absolute alcohol) reaction
and 1 mL glacial acetic acid along mixture
with a few drops of concentrated
sulphuric acid in a test tube. Beaker
Warm in a water-bath for at least five Water

minutes as shown in Fig. 4.11.
Pour into a beaker containing
20-50 mL of water and smell the
resulting mixture.

Wire gauze
Tripod stand

Burner
Reactions of ethanoic acid:

(i) Esterification reaction: Esters are most commonly
formed by reaction of an acid and an alcohol.
Ethanoic acid reacts with absolute ethanol in the
presence of an acid catalyst to give an ester -

Figure 4.11
CH,—COOH + CH,—CH,OH—4“4 5cH,—-C-O—CH,—CH, Formation of ester
fe)
(Ethanoic acid) (Ethanol) (Ester)

Esters are sweet-smelling substances. These are used in making
perfumes and as flavouring agents. Esters react in the presence of
an acid or a base to give back the alcohol and carboxylic acid. This
reaction is known as saponification because it is used in the
preparation of soap.

Carbon and its Compounds 73

Page_Number 73 ended
/n
Page_Number 74 started
(ii)

Activity 4.9

CH,COOC,H, —X204_,¢,H,0H+CH,COOH
Reaction with a base: Like mineral acids, ethanoic acid reacts with
a base such as sodium hydroxide to give a salt (sodium ethanoate
or commonly called sodium acetate) and water:
NaOH + CH,COOH + CH,COONa + H,O
How does ethanoic acid react with carbonates and
hydrogencarbonates?

Let us perform an activity to find out.

Set up the apparatus as shown in Chapter 2, Activity 2.5.
Take a spatula full of sodium carbonate in a test tube and add 2 mL of dilute

ethanoic acid.

What do you observe?
Pass the gas produced through freshly prepared lime-water. What do you observe?

Can the gas produce

d by the reaction between ethanoic acid and sodium carbonate be

identified by this test?
Repeat this Activity with sodium hydrogencarbonate instead of sodium carbonate.

(iii) Reaction with carbonates and hydrogencarbonates: Ethanoic acid
reacts with carbonates and hydrogencarbonates to give rise to a
salt, carbon dioxide and water. The salt produced is commonly called
sodium acetate.

2CH,COOH + Na,CO, > 2CH,COONa + H,0 + CO,
CH,COOH + NaHCO, > CH,COONa +H,0 + CO,

QUES TION §S

How would you distinguish experimentally between an alcohol and

a carboxylic acid?

What are oxidisin:

g agents?

nat 4.5 SOAPS AND DETERGENTS

Nat
Nat
Figure 4.12
Formation of micelles
74

Activity 4.10

Take about 10 mL of water each in two test tubes.
Add a drop of oil (cooking oil) to both the test tubes
and label them as A and B.
Oil To test tube B, add a few drops of soap solution.
droplet Now shake both the test tubes vigourously for
the same period of time.
Can you see the oil and water layers separately
Nat in both the test tubes immediately after you
stop shaking them?
Leave the test tubes undisturbed for some time
and observe. Does the oil layer separate out?
In which test tube does this happen first?

Science

Page_Number 74 ended
/n
Page_Number 75 started
This activity demonstrates the effect of soap in cleaning. Most dirt is
oily in nature and as you know, oil does not dissolve in water. The
molecules of soap are sodium or potassium salts of long-chain carboxylic
acids. The ionic-end of soap dissolves in water while the carbon chain
dissolves in oil. The soap molecules, thus form structures called micelles
(see Fig. 4.12) where one end of the molecules is towards the oil droplet
while the ionic-end faces outside. This forms an emulsion in water. The
soap micelle thus helps in dissolving the dirt in water and we can wash
our clothes clean (Fig. 4.13).

Can you draw the structure of the micelle that would be formed if
you dissolve soap in a hydrocarbon?

Micelles
Soaps are molecules in which the two ends have differing properties, one is hydrophilic,
that is, it dissolves in water, while the other end is hydrophobic, that is, it dissolves in
hydrocarbons. When soap is at the surface of water, the hydrophobic ‘tail’ of soap will
not be soluble in water and the soap will align along the surface of water with the
ionic end in water and the hydrocarbon ‘tail’ protruding out of water. Inside water,

Hydrophilic end Hydrophobic end
— Oren
Soap molecul

these molecules have a unique orientation that keeps
the hydrocarbon portion out of the water. This is
achieved by forming clusters of molecules in which
the hydrophobic tails are in the interior of the cluster
and the ionic ends are on the surface of the cluster.
This formation is called a micelle. Soap in the form of
a micelle is able to clean, since the oily dirt will be
collected in the centre of the micelle. The micelles stay
in solution as a colloid and will not come together to
precipitate because of ion-ion repulsion. Thus, the
dirt suspended in the micelles is also easily rinsed
away. The soap micelles are large enough to scatter
light. Hence a soap solution appears cloudy.

More to Know!

Figure 4.13 Effect of soap in cleaning

Carbon and its Compounds 75

Page_Number 75 ended
/n
Page_Number 76 started
Activity 4.11

Take about 10 mL of distilled water (or rain water) and 10 mL of
hard water (from a tubewell or hand-pump) in separate test tubes.
Add a couple of drops of soap solution to both.

Shake the test tubes vigorously for an equal period of time and
observe the amount of foam formed.

In which test tube do you get more foam?

In which test tube do you observe a white curdy precipitate?
Note for the teacher: If hard water is not available in your locality,
prepare some hard water by dissolving hydrogencarbonates/
sulphates/chlorides of calcium or magnesium in water.

Activity 4.12

Take two test tubes with about 10 mL of hard water in each.
Add five drops of soap solution to one and five drops of detergent
solution to the other.

Shake both test tubes for the same period.

Do both test tubes have the same amount of foam?

In which test tube is a curdy solid formed?

Have you ever observed while bathing that foam is formed with
difficulty and an insoluble substance (scum) remains after washing with
water? This is caused by the reaction of soap with the calcium and
magnesium salts, which cause the hardness of water. Hence you need
to use a larger amount of soap. This problem is overcome by using
another class of compounds called detergents as cleansing agents.
Detergents are generally ammonium or sulphonate salts of long chain
carboxylic acids. The charged ends of these compounds do not form
insoluble precipitates with the calcium and magnesium ions in hard
water. Thus, they remain effective in hard water. Detergents are usually
used to make shampoos and products for cleaning clothes.

QUES TION S

Would you be able to check if water is hard by using a detergent?

People use a variety of methods to wash clothes. Usually after adding
the soap, they ‘beat’ the clothes on a stone, or beat it with a paddle,
scrub with a brush or the mixture is agitated in a washing machine.

Why is agitation necessary to get clean clothes?

76 Science

Page_Number 76 ended
/n
Page_Number 77 started
Carbon is a versatile element that forms the basis for all living organisms and many
of the things we use.

This large variety of compounds is formed by carbon because of its tetravalency
and the property of catenation that it exhibits.

Covalent bonds are formed by the sharing of electrons between two atoms so that
both can achieve a completely filled outermost shell.

Carbon forms covalent bonds with itself and other elements such as hydrogen,
oxygen, sulphur, nitrogen and chlorine.

Carbon also forms compounds containing double and triple bonds between carbon
atoms. These carbon chains may be in the form of straight chains, branched chains
or rings.

The ability of carbon to form chains gives rise to a homologous series of compounds
in which the same functional group is attached to carbon chains of different lengths.
The functional groups such as alcohols, aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids
bestow characteristic properties to the carbon compounds that contain them.
Carbon and its compounds are some of our major sources of fuels.

Ethanol and ethanoic acid are carbon compounds of importance in our daily lives.
The action of soaps and detergents is based on the presence of both hydrophobic

and hydrophilic groups in the molecule and this helps to emulsify the oily dirt and
hence its removal.

1. Ethane, with the molecular formula C,H, has
(a) 6 covalent bonds.
(b) 7 covalent bonds.
(c) 8covalent bonds.
(d) 9 covalent bonds.

2. Butanone is a four-carbon compound with the functional group
(a) carboxylic acid.
(b) aldehyde.
(c) ketone.
(d) alcohol.

3. While cooking, if the bottom of the vessel is getting blackened on the outside,
it means that

(a) _ the food is not cooked completely.
(b) the fuelis not burning completely.
(c) the fuel is wet.

(d) the fuelis burning completely.

Carbon and its Compounds 77

Page_Number 77 ended
/n
Page_Number 78 started
Explain the nature of the covalent bond using the bond formation in CH,Cl.
Draw the electron dot structures for

(a) ethanoic acid.

(b) HS.

(ec) propanone.

(dd) F,.

What is an homologous series? Explain with an example.

How can ethanol and ethanoic acid be differentiated on the basis of their physical
and chemical properties?

Why does micelle formation take place when soap is added to water? Will a micelle
be formed in other solvents such as ethanol also?

Why are carbon and its compounds used as fuels for most applications?
. Explain the formation of scum when hard water is treated with soap.
. What change will you observe if you test soap with litmus paper (red and blue)?
. What is hydrogenation? What is its industrial application?
. Which of the following hydrocarbons undergo addition reactions:
C,H, C,H,, C,H, C,H, and CH,.

26’
Give a test that can be used to differentiate chemically between butter and
cooking oil.

. Explain the mechanism of the cleaning action of soaps.

I Use molecular model kits to make models of the compounds you have learnt in
this Chapter.

II Take about 20 mL of castor oil/cotton seed oil/linseed oil/soyabean oil ina
beaker. Add 30 mL of 20 % sodium hydroxide solution. Heat the mixture with
continuous stirring for a few minutes till the mixture thickens. Add 5-10 g of
common salt to this. Stir the mixture well and allow it to cool.

You can cut out the soap in fancy shapes. You can also add perfume to the
soap before it sets.

78 Science

Page_Number 78 ended
/n
Page_Number 79 started
CHAPTER 5
Periodic Classification
of Elements

n Class LX we have learnt that matter around us is present in the form
of elements, compounds and mixtures and the elements contain atoms
of only one type. Do you know how many elements are known till date?
At present, 114 elements are known to us. Around the year 1800, only
30 elements were known. All these had seemingly different properties.
As different elements were being discovered, scientists gathered more
and more information about the properties ofthese elements. They found
it difficult to organise all that was known about the elements. They started
looking for some pattern in their properties, on the basis of which they
could study such a large number of elements with ease.

5.1 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHAOS - EARLY
ATTEMPTS AT THE CLASSIFICATION OF
ELEMENTS

We have been learning how various things or living beings can
be classified on the basis of their properties. Even in other
situations, we come across instances of organisation based
on some properties. For example, in a shop, soaps are kept
together at one place while biscuits are kept together elsewhere.
Even among soaps, bathing soaps are stacked separately from
washing soaps. Similarly, scientists made several attempts to
classify elements according to their properties and obtain an
orderly arrangement out of chaos. Figure 5.1

The earliest attempt to classify the elements resulted in Imagine you and your friends have
grouping the then known elements as metals and non-metals. found pieces ef an old map to reach
Later further classifications were tried out as our knowledge “easure. Would it be easy or

. sot chaotic to find the way to the
of elements and their properties increased. treasure? Similar chaos was there

in Chemistry as elements were

5.1.1 Débereiner’s Triads known but there was no clue as to
how to classifiy and study about them.

In the year 1817, Johann Wolfgang Débereiner, a German

chemist, tried to arrange the elements with similar properties into groups.
He identified some groups having three elements each. So he called these
groups ‘triads’. Débereiner showed that when the three elements ina

Page_Number 79 ended
/n
Page_Number 80 started
Dobereiner’s triads

Table 5.2
Li Ca
Na Sr
K Ba

80

Cl

Br

I

triad were written in the order of increasing atomic masses; the atomic
mass of the middle element was roughly the average of the atomic masses
of the other two elements.

For example, take the triad consisting of lithium (Li), sodium (Na)
and potassium (K) with the respective atomic masses 6.9, 23.0 and 39.0.
What is the average of the atomic masses of Li and K? How does this
compare with the atomic mass of Na?

Given below (Table 5.1) are some groups of three elements. These
elements are arranged downwards in order of increasing atomic masses.
Can you find out which of these groups form Débereiner triads?

Table 5.1

Group A | Atomic Group B_ | Atomic Group C | Atomic
element mass element mass elements mass
N Ca Cl

14.0 40.1 35. 5
P 31.0 Sr 87.6 Br 79.9
As 74.9 Ba 137.3 I 126.9

You will find that groups B and C form Débereiner triads. Débereiner
could identify only three triads from the elements known at that time
(Table 5.2). Hence, this system of classification into triads was not found
to be useful.

Johann Wolfgang Débereiner (1780-1849)

Johann Wolfgang Doébereiner studied as a
pharmacist at Minchberg in Germany, and then
studied chemistry at Strasbourg. Eventually he

became a professor of chemistry and pharmacy
at the University of Jena. Débereiner made the
first observations on platinum as a catalyst and
discovered similar triads of elements which led to
the development of the Periodic Table of elements.

5.1.2 Newlands’ Law of Octaves

The attempts of Débereiner encouraged other chemists to correlate the
properties of elements with their atomic masses. In 1866, John Newlands,
an English scientist, arranged the then known elements in the order of
increasing atomic masses. He started with the element having the lowest
atomic mass (hydrogen) and ended at thorium which was the 56"
element. He found that every eighth element had properties similar to
that of the first. He compared this to the octaves found in music.
Therefore, he called it the ‘Law of Octaves’. It is known as ‘Newlands’
Law of Octaves’. In Newlands’ Octaves, the properties of lithium and
sodium were found to be the same. Sodium is the eighth element after
lithium. Similarly, beryllium and magnesium resemble each other. A
part of the original form of Newlands’ Octaves is given in Table 5.3.

Science

Page_Number 80 ended
/n
Page_Number 81 started
Table 5.3 Newlands’ Octaves

. sa ga ma pa da
Notes of music: (do) (mi) (fa) (so) (la)
H Li Be B Cc N [@)

F Na Mg Al Si P Ss
Cl K Ca Cr Ti Mn Fe
Co and Ni Cu Zn Y In As Se
Br Rb Sr Ce and La Zr = =

Are you familiar with musical notes?
In the Indian system of music, there are seven musical notes in ascale — sa, re, ga, ma, pa,

da, ni. In the west, they use the notations - do, re, mi, fa, so, la, ti. The notes in a scale are
separated by whole and half-step frequency intervals of tones and semitones. A musician
uses these notes for composing the music of a song. Naturally, there must be some repetition
of notes. Every eighth note is similar to the first one and it is the first note of the next scale.

Do You Know?

It was found that the Law of Octaves was applicable only upto
calcium, as after calcium every eighth element did not possess
properties similar to that of the first.
= Itwas assumed by Newlands that only 56 elements existed in nature
and no more elements would be discovered in the future. But, later
on, several new elements were discovered, whose properties did not
fit into the Law of Octaves.
= Inorder to fit elements into his Table, Newlands adjusted two elements
in the same slot, but also put some unlike elements under the same
note. Can you find examples of these from Table 5.3? Note that cobalt
and nickel are in the same slot and these are placed in the same
column as fluorine, chlorine and bromine which have very different
properties than these elements. Iron, which resembles cobalt and
nickel in properties, has been placed far away from these elements.

Thus, Newlands’ Law of Octaves worked well with lighter elements only.

Q U ES TION S

Did Débereiner’s triads also exist in the columns of Newlands’ Octaves?

Compare and find out.

What were the limitations of Débereiner’s classification?
What were the limitations of Newlands’ Law of Octaves?

5.2 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHAOS — MENDELEEV’S
PERIODIC TABLE

Even after the rejection of Newlands’ Law of Octaves, many scientists
continued to search for a pattern that correlated the properties of elements
with their atomic masses.

Periodic Classification of Elements 81

Page_Number 81 ended
/n
Page_Number 82 started
82

The main credit for classifying elements goes to Dmitri Ivanovich
Mendeléev, a Russian chemist. He was the most important contributor
to the early development of a Periodic Table of elements wherein the
elements were arranged on the basis of their fundamental property, the
atomic mass, and also on the similarity of chemical properties.

Dmitri lvanovich Mendeléev (1834-1907)

Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeléev was

born in Tobolsk in Western Siberia,

Russia on 8 February 1834. After

his early education, Mendeléev

could join a university only due to

the efforts of his mother. Dedicating

his investigations to his mother he

wrote, “She instructed with

example, corrected with love and

travelled with me to places

spending her last resources and

strength. She knew that with the

aid of science without violence, with love but firmness, all
superstitions, untruth and errors can be removed.” The
arrangement of elements he proposed is called Mendeléev’s
Periodic Table. The Periodic Table proved to be the unifying
principle in chemistry. It was the motivation for the discovery of
some new elements.

When Mendeléev started his work, 63 elements were known. He
examined the relationship between the atomic masses of the elements
and their physical and chemical properties. Among chemical properties,
Mendeléev concentrated on the compounds formed by elements with
oxygen and hydrogen. He selected hydrogen and oxygen as they are
very reactive and formed compounds with most elements. The formulae
of the hydrides and oxides formed by an element were treated as one of
the basic properties of an element for its classification. He then took 63
cards and on each card he wrote down the properties of one element. He
sorted out the elements with similar properties and pinned the cards
together on a wall. He observed that most of the elements got a place in
a Periodic Table and were arranged in the order of their increasing atomic
masses. It was also observed that there occurs a periodic recurrence of
elements with similar physical and chemical properties. On this basis,
Mendeléev formulated a Periodic Law, which states that ‘the properties
of elements are the periodic function of their atomic masses’.

Mendeléev’s Periodic Table contains vertical columns called ‘groups’
and horizontal rows called ‘periods’ (Table 5.4).

Science

Page_Number 82 ended
/n
Page_Number 83 started
Table 5.4 Mendeléev’s Periodic Table

Group I it big Iv v VI VIII
Oxide RO RO RO, RO, RO, RO, RO, RO,
Hydride RH RH, RH, RH, RH, RH, RH
Periods A BA B A BA B A BA BA B Transition
| series
H
1 1.008
PI Li Be B c N fo) F
6.939 9.012 10.81 12.011 14.007 15.999 18.998
9 Na Mg Al Si P Ss cl
22.99 24.31 29.98 28.09 30.974 32.06 35.453
4 First K Ca Sc Ti Vv Cr Mn Fe Co Ni
series: 39.102 40.08 44.96 47.90 50.94 50.20 54.94 55.85 58.93 58.71
Second Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br
series: 63.54 65.37 69.72 72.59 74.92 78.96 79.909
5 First Rb Sr Y Zr Nb Mo Te Ru Rh Pd
series: 85.47 87.62 88.91 91.22 92.91 95.94 99 101.07 102.91 106.4
Second Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te I
series: 107.87. 112.40 114.82 11869 121.75 127.60 126.90
6 First Cs Ba La Hf Ta Ww Os Ir Pt
series; 132.90 137.34 138.91 178.49 180.95 183.85 190.2 192.2 195.09
Second Au Hg Tl Pb Bi

series: 196.97 200.59 204.37 207.19 208.98

Mendeléev’s Periodic Table was published in a German journal in 1872. In the formula
for oxides and hydrides at the top of the columns, the letter ‘R’ is used to represent any
of the elements in the group. Note the way formulae are written. For example, the hydride
of carbon, CH,, is written as RH, and the oxide CO,, as RO,.

5.2.1 Achievements of Mendeléev’s Periodic Table

While developing the Periodic Table, there were a few instances where
Mendeléev had to place an element with a slightly greater atomic mass
before an element with a slightly lower atomic mass. The sequence was
inverted so that elements with similar properties could be grouped
together. For example, cobalt (atomic mass 58.9) appeared before nickel
(atomic mass 58.7). Looking at Table 5.4, can you find out one more
such anomaly?

Further, Mendeléev left some gaps in his Periodic Table. Instead of
looking upon these gaps as defects, Mendeléev boldly predicted the
existence of some elements that had not been discovered at that time.
Mendeléev named them by prefixing a Sanskrit numeral, Eka (one) to
the name of preceding element in the same group. For instance,
scandium, gallium and germanium, discovered later, have properties

Periodic Classification of Elements 83

Page_Number 83 ended
/n
Page_Number 84 started
84

similar to Eka-boron, Eka-aluminium and Eka-silicon, respectively. The
properties of Eka-Aluminium predicted by Mendeléev and those of the
element, gallium which was discovered later and replaced Eka-
aluminium, are listed as follows (Table 5.5).

Table 5.5 Properties of eka-aluminium and gallium

[rere] scam [cam

Atomic Mass 69.7
Formula of Oxide eo, Ga,O,
Formula of Chloride EC, GaCl,

This provided convincing evidence for both the correctness and
usefulness of Mendeléev’s Periodic Table. Further, it was the
extraordinary success of Mendeléev’s prediction that led chemists not
only to accept his Periodic Table but also recognise him, as the originator
of the concept on which it is based. Noble gases like helium (He), neon
(Ne) and argon (Ar) have been mentioned in many a context before this.
These gases were discovered very late because they are very inert and
present in extremely low concentrations in our atmosphere. One of the
strengths of Mendeléev’s Periodic Table was that, when these gases were
discovered, they could be placed in a new group without disturbing the
existing order.

5,2.2 Limitations of Mendeléev's Classification

Electronic configuration of
hydrogen resembles that of alkali
metals. Like alkali metals,

hydrogen combines with HCl NaCl
halogens, oxygen and sulphur

to form compounds having H,0 Na,O
similar formulae, as shown in H,S Na,s

the examples here.

On the other hand, just like halogens, hydrogen also exists as
diatomic molecules and it combines with metals and non-metals to form
covalent compounds.

Activity 5.1

Looking at its resemblance to alkali metals and the halogen family,
try to assign hydrogen a correct position in Mendeléev’s Periodic Table.

To which group and period should hydrogen be assigned?

Certainly, no fixed position can be given to hydrogen in the Periodic
Table. This was the first limitation of Mendeléev’s Periodic Table. He
could not assign a correct position to hydrogen in his Table.

Isotopes were discovered long after Mendeléev had proposed his
periodic classification of elements. Let us recall that isotopes of an element
have similar chemical properties, but different atomic masses.

Science

Page_Number 84 ended
/n
Page_Number 85 started
Activity 5.2

Consider the isotopes of chlorine, Cl-35 and Cl-37.

Would you place them in different slots because their atomic
masses are different?

Or would you place them in the same position because their
chemical properties are the same?

Thus, isotopes of all elements posed a challenge to Mendeleev's
Periodic Law. Another problem was that the atomic masses do not increase
in aregular manner in going from one element to the next. So it was not
possible to predict how many elements could be discovered between
two elements — especially when we consider the heavier elements.

Q U ES TION S

Use Mendeléev’s Periodic Table to predict the formulae for the oxides of
the following elements:

K, C, Al, Si, Ba.

Besides gallium, which other elements have since been discovered that
were left by Mendeléev in his Periodic Table? (any two)

What were the criteria used by Mendeléev in creating his Periodic Table?

Why do you think the noble gases are placed in a separate group?

5.3 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHAOS — THE MODERN
PERIODIC TABLE

In 1913, Henry Moseley showed that the atomic number of an element
is a more fundamental property than its atomic mass as described below.
Accordingly, Mendeléev's Periodic Law was modified and atomic number
was adopted as the basis of Modern Periodic Table and the Modern
Periodic Law can be stated as follows:

‘Properties of elements are a periodic function of their atomic number.’

Let us recall that the atomic number gives us the number of protons
in the nucleus of an atom and this number increases by one in going
from one element to the next. Elements, when arranged in order of
increasing atomic number Z, lead us to the classification known as the
Modern Periodic Table (Table 5.6). Prediction of properties of elements
could be made with more precision when elements were arranged on
the basis of increasing atomic number.

Activity 5.3

How were the positions of cobalt and nickel resolved in the Modern Periodic Table?

How were the positions of isotopes of various elements decided in the Modern Periodic Table?
Is it possible to have an element with atomic number 1.5 placed between hydrogen
and helium?

Where do you think should hydrogen be placed in the Modern Periodic Table?

Periodic Classification of Elements 85

Page_Number 85 ended
/n
Page_Number 86 started
Nl,
d ie} aL Soplounoy ,.,
v6 C6 16 06
aL nq | WS PN Id 29) | saproueyuey,
$9 £9 (6) 09 6S 8s
ira) 977) (77)
- - an | 3a | sa | w ] sH | ua | 8s | aa | se fev | Pe |
zit | ttt | ott | 601 | got | zor | 901 | sot | ror | 68 | 88 | zg
(ze) 01! Tore 0607 TLOT 9007 OL6r TS6r Tc tél TO6L TORT esl OTST S8LT 6 RET elel oct
iq | 4d H id q] ow } MM | BL xe] | e@ | sp
eg | 78 08 8L LL se | vl | €L Ls | 9s | ss
S1TL sil PTL ¥90T e70r T66) 66 66 O88 LB sy
uownuy uy, ummupe3 wmpeyea | umpoyy 1 |umuapgsjow} umigory wen, unnuong | umipiqny
ox qs | us ie) Pd | 4M oL | OW | GN A | is | a
vs Is_| os 8b ov | sp ep _| Zt Iv oe | se | Le
an a | 3] 0s] 095 oa a rae q
uodry, ouyworg, omuasty UZ saddo, PHN eqo asoursuey | ummuosyg | wmipeua wmpuesg | umieg | umissmog
my | Ja sv uz | nD | IN | 09 ww} 4D A og | 2 | X
9¢ | se ef oe | 6z | sz | Lz st | €@ 1 | oz | 61
66E ose ole T8c eve O8e
a ~ ) mono “es ZI Il Ol 6 8 L 9 $ v € ae “aR
gl | LI SI < > | 7 IL
ae ts YAGWAN dnNOUD ‘ come
oN N YT
Ol 6 8 L €
7
Ll rs ne 2 Z| ethan
H
I
YAGWNNAN dNoUd
YAGINAN dnowd
“syejoul-uou

oy) WO spejou

oul] Sezsiz oy,

oy} soyeredas

LL

[ STBJOUI-UON

IGVL Wpopisg UIIpoW| 9°S 2IGeL

sproyress |

[ syeioy

amwiioAan

Science

86

Page_Number 86 ended
/n
Page_Number 87 started
As we can see, the Modern Periodic Table takes care of three
limitations of Mendléev's Periodic Table. The anomalous position of
hydrogen can be discussed after we see what are the bases on which the
position of an element in the Modern Periodic Table depends.

5.3.1 Position of Elements in the Modern Periodic Table

The Modern Periodic Table has 18 vertical columns known as ‘groups’
and 7 horizontal rows known as ‘periods’. Let us see what decides the
placing of an element in a certain group and period.

Activity 5.4

Look at the group 1 of the Modern Periodic Table, and name the
elements present in it.

Write down the electronic configuration of the first three elements
of group 1.

What similarity do you find in their electronic configurations?
How many valence electrons are present in these three elements?

You will find that all these elements contain the same number of
valence electrons. Similarly, you will find that the elements present in
any one group have the same number of valence electrons. For example,
elements fluorine (F) and chlorine (Cl), belong to group 17, how many
electrons do fluorine and chlorine have in their outermost shells? Hence,
we can say that groups in the Periodic Table signify an identical outer-
shell electronic configuration. On the other hand, the number of shells
increases as we go down the group.

There is an anomaly when it comes to the position of hydrogen
because it can be placed either in group 1 or group 17 in the first period.
Can you say why?

Activity 5.5

If you look at the long form of the Periodic Table, you will find that
the elements Li, Be, B, C, N, O, F, and Ne are present in the second
period. Write down their electronic configuration.

Do these elements also contain the same number of valence
electrons?

Do they contain the same number of shells?

You will find that these elements do not have the same number of
valence electrons, but they contain the same number of shells. You also
observe that the number of valence shell electrons increases by one unit,
as the atomic number increases by one unit on moving from left to right
ina period.

Or we can say that atoms of different elements with the same number
of occupied shells are placed in the same period. Na, Mg, Al, Si, P, S, Cl
and Ar belong to the third period of the Modern Periodic Table, since the
electrons in the atoms of these elements are filled in K, Land M shells.
Write the electronic configuration of these elements and confirm the above
statement. Each period marks a new electronic shell getting filled.

Periodic Classification of Elements

87

Page_Number 87 ended
/n
Page_Number 88 started
88

How many elements are there in the first, second, third and fourth
periods?

We can explain the number of elements in these periods based on
how electrons are filled into various shells. You will study the details of
this in higher classes. Recall that the maximum number of electrons
that can be accommodated in a shell depends on the formula 2n? where
‘n’ is the number of the given shell from the nucleus.

For example,

KShell — 2 x (1)?=2, hence the first period has 2 elements.

LShell - 2 x (2)?=8, hence the second period has 8 elements.

MShell - 2 x (3)? = 18, but the outermost shell can have only
8 electrons, so the third period also has only 8 elements.

The position of an element in the Periodic Table tells us about its
chemical reactivity. As you have learnt, the valence electrons determine
the kind and number of bonds formed by an element. Can you now say
why Mendeléev’s choice of formulae of compounds as the basis for
deciding the position of an element in his Table was a good one? How
would this lead to elements with similar chemical properties being placed
in the same group?

5.3.2 Trends in the Modern Periodic Table

Valency : As you know, the valency of an element is determined by the
number of valence electrons present in the outermost shell of its atom.

Activity 5.6

How do you calculate the valency of an element from its electronic
configuration?

What is the valency of magnesium with atomic number 12 and
sulphur with atomic number 16?

Similarly find out the valencies of the first twenty elements.
How does the valency vary in a period on going from left to right?
How does the valency vary in going down a group?

Atomic size: The term atomic size refers to the radius of an atom. The
atomic size may be visualised as the distance between the centre of the
nucleus and the outermost shell of an isolated atom. The atomic radius
of hydrogen atom is 37 pm (picometre, 1 pm = 107m).

Let us study the variation of atomic size in a group and in a period.

Activity 5.7

Atomic radii of the elements of the second period are given below:
Period II elements: B Be 0 N Li Cc
Atomic radius (pm): 88 111 66 74 152 77

Arrange them in decreasing order of their atomic radii.

Are the elements now arranged in the pattern of a period in the
Periodic Table?

Which elements have the largest and the smallest atoms?

How does the atomic radius change as you go from left to right in
a period?

Science

Page_Number 88 ended
/n
Page_Number 89 started
You will see that the atomic radius decreases in moving from left to
right along a period. This is due to an increase in nuclear charge which
tends to pull the electrons closer to the nucleus and reduces the size of
the atom.

Activity 5.8

Study the variation in the atomic radii of first group elements
given below and arrange them in an increasing order.

Group 1 Elements : Na Li Rb Cs K

Atomic Radius (pm): 86 152 244 262 231

Name the elements which have the smallest and the largest atoms.
How does the atomic size vary as you go down a group?

You will see that the atomic size increases down the group. This is
because new shells are being added as we go down the group. This
increases the distance between the outermost electrons and the nucleus
so that the atomic size increases in spite of the increase in nuclear charge.

Metallic and Non-metallic Properties

Activity 5.9

Examine elements of the third period and classify them as metals
and non-metals.

On which side of the Periodic Table do you find the metals?
On which side of the Periodic Table do you find the non-metals?

As we can see, the metals like Na and Mg are towards the left-hand
side of the Periodic Table while the non-metals like sulphur and chlorine
are found on the right-hand side. In the middle, we have silicon, which
is classified as a semi-metal or metalloid because it exhibits some
properties of both metals and non-metals.

In the Modern Periodic Table, a zig-zag line separates metals from
non-metals. The borderline elements — boron, silicon, germanium,
arsenic, antimony, tellurium and polonium — are intermediate in
properties and are called metalloids or semi-metals.

As you have seen in Chapter 3, metals tend to lose electrons while
forming bonds, that is, they are electropositive in nature.

Activity 5.10

How do you think the tendency to lose electrons will change in a
group?
How will this tendency change in a period?

As the effective nuclear charge acting on the valence shell electrons

increases across a period, the tendency to lose electrons will decrease.
Down the group, the effective nuclear charge experienced by valence

Periodic Classification of Elements

89

Page_Number 89 ended
/n
Page_Number 90 started
electrons is decreasing because the outermost electrons are farther away
from the nucleus. Therefore, these can be lost easily. Hence metallic
character decreases across a period and increases down a group.
Non-metals, on the other hand, are electronegative. They tend to form
bonds by gaining electrons. Let us learn about the variation of this

property.

Activity 5.11

= How would the tendency to gain electrons change as you go from
left to right across a period?

= How would the tendency to gain electrons change as you go down
a group?

As the trends in the electronegativity show, non-metals are found on
the right-hand side of the Periodic Table towards the top.

These trends also help us to predict the nature of oxides formed by
the elements because it is known to you that the oxides of metals are
basic and that of non-metals are acidic in general.

How could the Modern Periodic Table remove various anomalies of
Mendeléev’s Periodic Table?

Name two elements you would expect to show chemical reactions similar
to magnesium. What is the basis for your choice?

Name

(a) three elements that have a single electron in their outermost shells.
(b) two elements that have two electrons in their outermost shells.
(c) three elements with filled outermost shells.

(a) Lithium, sodium, potassium are all metals that react with water
to liberate hydrogen gas. Is there any similarity in the atoms of
these elements?

(b) Helium is an unreactive gas and neon is a gas of extremely low
reactivity. What, if anything, do their atoms have in common?

In the Modern Periodic Table, which are the metals among the first ten
elements?

By considering their position in the Periodic Table, which one of the
following elements would you expect to have maximum metallic
characteristic?

Ga

90 Science

Page_Number 90 ended
/n
Page_Number 91 started
Elements are classified on the basis of similarities in their properties.
Dobereiner grouped the elements into triads and Newlands gave the Law of Octaves.

Mendeléev arranged the elements in increasing order of their atomic masses and
according to their chemical properties.

Mendeléev even predicted the existence of some yet to be discovered elements on
the basis of gaps in his Periodic Table.

Anomalies in arrangement of elements based on increasing atomic mass could be
removed when the elements were arranged in order of increasing atomic number,
a fundamental property of the element discovered by Moseley.

Elements in the Modern Periodic Table are arranged in 18 vertical columns called
groups and 7 horizontal rows called periods.

Elements thus arranged show periodicity of properties including atomic size,
valency or combining capacity and metallic and non-metallic character.

1. Which of the following statements is not a correct statement about the trends when
going from left to right across the periods of periodic Table.
(a) The elements become less metallic in nature.
(b) The number of valence electrons increases.

(c) The atoms lose their electrons more easily.

(d) The oxides become more acidic.

2. Element X forms a chloride with the formula XCl,, which is a solid with a high
melting point. X would most likely be in the same group of the Periodic Table as
(a) Na (b) Mg (c) Al (d) Si

3. Which element has
(a) two shells, both of which are completely filled with electrons?
(b) the electronic configuration 2, 8, 2?
(c) atotal of three shells, with four electrons in its valence shell?
(d) a total of two shells, with three electrons in its valence shell?
(ec) twice as many electrons in its second shell as in its first shell?

4. (a) What property do all elements in the same column of the Periodic Table as
boron have in common?

(b) What property do all elements in the same column of the Periodic Table as
fluorine have in common?

5. Anatom has electronic configuration 2, 8, 7.
(a) What is the atomic number of this element?
(b) To which of the following elements would it be chemically similar?
(Atomic numbers are given in parentheses.)
N(7) F(9) P(15) Ar(18)

Periodic Classification of Elements 91

Page_Number 91 ended
/n
Page_Number 92 started
6. The position of three elements A, B and C in the Periodic Table are shown below —
Group 16 Group 17
= A
B Cc
(a) State whether Ais a metal or non-metal.
(b) State whether C is more reactive or less reactive than A.
(c) Will C be larger or smaller in size than B?
(d) Which type of ion, cation or anion, will be formed by element A?

Nitrogen (atomic number 7) and phosphorus (atomic number 15) belong to
group 15 of the Periodic Table. Write the electronic configuration of these two
elements. Which of these will be more electronegative? Why?

How does the electronic configuration of an atom relate to its position in the Modern
Periodic Table?

In the Modern Periodic Table, calcium (atomic number 20) is surrounded by
elements with atomic numbers 12, 19, 21 and 38. Which of these have physical
and chemical properties resembling calcium?

Compare and contrast the arrangement of elements in Mendeléev’'s Periodic Table
and the Modern Periodic Table.

I We have discussed the major attempts made for classifying elements. Find out
(from the internet or library) about other attempts to classify elements.

Il We have studied the long form of the Periodic Table. The Modern Periodic Law has
been used to arrange elements in other ways too. Find out what are these.

92 Science

Page_Number 92 ended
/n
Page_Number 93 started
CHAPTER 6
Life Processes

H” do we tell the difference between what is alive and what is not
alive? If we see a dog running, or a cow chewing cud, or a man
shouting loudly on the street, we know that these are living beings. What
if the dog or the cow or the man were asleep? We would still think that
they were alive, but how did we know that? We see them breathing, and
we know that they are alive. What about plants? How do we know that
they are alive? We see them green, some of us will say. But what about
plants that have leaves of colours other than green? They grow over
time, so we know that they are alive, some will say. In other words, we
tend to think of some sort of movement, either growth-related or not, as
common evidence for being alive. But a plant that is not visibly growing is
still alive, and some animals can breathe without visible movement. So
using visible movement as the defining characteristic of life is not enough.

Movements over very small scales will be invisible to the naked eye -
movements of molecules, for example. Is this invisible molecular
movement necessary for life? If we ask this question to professional
biologists, they will say yes. In fact, viruses do not show any molecular
movement in them (until they infect some cell), and that is partly why
there is a controversy about whether they are truly alive or not.

Why are molecular movements needed for life? We have seen in earlier
classes that living organisms are well-organised structures; they can
have tissues, tissues have cells, cells have smaller components in them,
and so on. Because of the effects of the environment, this organised,
ordered nature of living structures is very likely to keep breaking down
over time. If order breaks down, the organism will no longer be alive. So
living creatures must keep repairing and maintaining their structures.
Since all these structures are made up of molecules, they must move
molecules around all the time.

What are the maintenance processes in living organisms?
Let us explore.

6.1 WHAT ARE LIFE PROCESSES?

The maintenance functions of living organisms must go on even when
they are not doing anything particular. Even when we are just sitting in

Page_Number 93 ended
/n
Page_Number 94 started
94

class, even if we are just asleep, this maintenance job has to go on.
The processes which together perform this maintenance job are
life processes.

Since these maintenance processes are needed to prevent damage
and break-down, energy is needed for them. This energy comes from
outside the body of the individual organism. So there must be a process
to transfer a source of energy from outside the body of the organism,
which we call food, to the inside, a process we commonly call nutrition.
If the body size of the organisms is to grow, additional raw material will
also be needed from outside. Since life on earth depends on carbon-
based molecules, most of these food sources are also carbon-based.
Depending on the complexity of these carbon sources, different
organisms can then use different kinds of nutritional processes.

The outside sources of energy could be quite varied, since the
environment is not under the control of the individual organism. These
sources of energy, therefore, need to be broken down or built up in the
body, and must be finally converted to a uniform source of energy that
can be used for the various molecular movements needed for
maintaining living structures, as well as to the kind of molecules the
body needs to grow. For this, a series of chemical reactions in the
body are necessary. Oxidising-reducing reactions are some of the most
common chemical means to break-down molecules. For this, many
organisms use oxygen sourced from outside the body. The process
of acquiring oxygen from outside the body, and to use it in the process
of break-down of food sources for cellular needs, is what we call
respiration.

In the case of a single-celled organism, no specific organs for taking
in food, exchange of gases or removal of wastes may be needed because
the entire surface of the organism is in contact with the environment.
But what happens when the body size of the organism increases and
the body design becomes more complex? In multi-cellular organisms,
all the cells may not be in direct contact with the surrounding
environment. Thus, simple diffusion will not meet the requirements of
all the cells.

We have seen previously how, in multi-cellular organisms, various
body parts have specialised in the functions they perform. We are familiar
with the idea of these specialised tissues, and with their organisation in
the body of the organism. It is therefore not surprising that the uptake
of food and of oxygen will also be the function of specialised tissues.
However, this poses a problem, since the food and oxygen are now taken
up at one place in the body of the organisms, while all parts of the body
need them. This situation creates a need for a transportation system for
carrying food and oxygen from one place to another in the body.

When chemical reactions use the carbon source and the oxygen for
energy generation, they create by-products that are not only useless
for the cells of the body, but could even be harmful. These waste by-
products are therefore needed to be removed from the body and discarded
outside by a process called excretion. Again, if the basic rules for body

Science

Page_Number 94 ended
/n
Page_Number 95 started
design in multi-cellular organisms are followed, a specialised tissue for
excretion will be developed, which means that the transportation system
will need to transport waste away from cells to this excretory tissue.

Let us consider these various processes, so essential to maintain
life, one by one.

Q U ES TION §S

Why is diffusion insufficient to meet the oxygen requirements of multi-
cellular organisms like humans?

What criteria do we use to decide whether something is alive?

What are outside raw material: ed for by an organism?

What processes would you consider essential for maintaining life?

6.2 NUTRITION

When we walk or ride a bicycle, we are using up energy. Even when we
are not doing any apparent activity, energy is needed to maintain a
state of order in our body. We also need materials from outside in order
to grow, develop, synthesise protein and other substances needed in
the body. This source of energy and materials is the food we eat.

How do living things get their food?

The general requirement for energy and materials is common in all
organisms, but it is fulfilled in different ways. Some organisms use simple
food material obtained from inorganic sources in the form of carbon
dioxide and water. These organisms, the autotrophs, include green
plants and some bacteria. Other organisms utilise complex substances.
These complex substances have to be broken down into simpler ones
before they can be used for the upkeep and growth of the body. To
achieve this, organisms use bio-catalysts called enzymes. Thus, the
heterotrophs survival depends directly or indirectly on autotrophs.
Heterotrophic organisms include animals and fungi.

6.2.1 Autotrophic Nutrition

Carbon and energy requirements of the autotrophic organism are
fulfilled by photosynthesis. It is the process by which autotrophs take
in substances from the outside and convert them into stored forms of
energy. This material is taken in the form of carbon dioxide and water
which is converted into carbohydrates in the presence of sunlight and
chlorophyll. Carbohydrates are utilised for providing energy to the plant.
We will study how this takes place in the next section. The carbohydrates
which are not used immediately are stored in the form of starch, which
serves as the internal energy reserve to be used as and when required
by the plant. Asomewhat similar situation is seen in us where some of
the energy derived from the food we eat is stored in our body in the form
of glycogen.

Life Processes 95

Page_Number 95 ended
/n
Page_Number 96 started
6CO, +6H,9 Chlorophyll _, © 11,0, +60,

Sunlight
(Glucose)

Let us now see what actually happens during the process of
photosynthesis. The following events occur during this process —

(i) Absorption of light energy by
chlorophyll.
Lamina or (ii) Conversion of light energy to chemical
leaf blade energy and splitting of water molecules
into hydrogen and oxygen.
(iii) Reduction of carbon dioxide to
carbohydrates.

These steps need not take place one after
Waxy the other immediately. For example, desert
cuticle plants take up carbon dioxide at night and
Upper prepare an intermediate which is acted upon
epidermis by the energy absorbed by the chlorophyll

during the day.

Let us see how each of the components of
the above reaction are necessary for
photosynthesis.

Ifyou carefully observe a cross-section ofa

) leaf under the microscope (shown in Fig. 6.1),
Lower you will notice that some cells contain green
oe ©) Mower dots. These green dots are cell organelles called
chloroplasts which contain chlorophyll. Let us
do an activity which demonstrates that

chlorophyll is essential for photosynthesis.

Midrib,

Phloem Xylem
Vascular bundle,

Figure 6.1
Cross-section of a leaf

Activity 6.1

Take a potted plant with variegated leaves - for example, money plant
or crotons.

Keep the plant in a dark room for three days so that all the starch
gets used up.

Now keep the plant in sunlight for about six hours.

Pluck a leaf from the plant. Mark the green areas in it and trace them
on a sheet of paper.

Dip the leaf in boiling water for a few minutes.

After this, immerse it in a beaker containing alcohol.

Carefully place the above beaker in a water-bath and heat till the
alcohol begins to boil.

What happens to the colour of the leaf? What is the colour of the
solution?

Now dip the leaf in a dilute solution of iodine for a few minutes.
Take out the leaf and rinse off the iodine solution.

Observe the colour of the leaf and compare this with the tracing of

Figure 6.2 the leaf done in the beginning (Fig. 6.2).
Variegated leaf (a) before What can you conclude about the presence of starch in various areas
and (b) after starch test of the leaf?

96 Science

Page_Number 96 ended
/n
Page_Number 97 started
Now, let us study how the plant
obtains carbon dioxide. In Class LX,
we had talked about stomata (Fig. 6.3)
which are tiny pores present on the
surface of the leaves. Massive amounts
of gaseous exchange takes place in the
leaves through these pores for the
purpose of photosynthesis. But it is
important to note here that exchange
of gases occurs across the surface of
stems, roots and leaves as well. Since
large amounts of water can also be lost
through these stomata, the plant
closes these pores when it does not

Guard cells

Stomatal pore

Chloroplast

(a)

Figure 6.3 (a) Open and (b) closed stomatal pore

need carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. The opening and closing of the
pore is a function of the guard cells. The guard cells swell when water
flows into them, causing the stomatal pore to open. Similarly the pore

closes if the guard cells shrink.

Activity 6.2

Take two healthy potted plants
which are nearly the same size.
Keep them in a dark room for
three days.

Now place each plant on
separate glass plates. Place a
watch-glass containing potassium
hydroxide by the side of one of
the plants. The potassium
hydroxide is used to absorb
carbon dioxide.

Cover both plants with separate
bell-jars as shown in Fig. 6.4.
Use vaseline to seal the bottom
of the jars to the glass plates so
that the set-up is air-tight.
Keep the plants in sunlight for
about two hours.

Bell jar:

Watch-glass
containing
potassium

hydroxide

©)

Figure 6.4 Experimental set-up (a) with potassium
hydroxide (b) without potassium hydroxide

Pluck a leaf from each plant and check for the presence of starch as in the above activity.
Do both the leaves show the presence of the same amount of starch?
What can you conclude from this activity?

Based on the two activities performed above, can we design an
experiment to demonstrate that sunlight is essential for photosynthesis?

So far, we have talked about how autotrophs meet their energy
requirements. But they also need other raw materials for building their
body. Water used in photosynthesis is taken up from the soil by the
roots in terrestrial plants. Other materials like nitrogen, phosphorus,
iron and magnesium are taken up from the soil. Nitrogen is an essential
element used in the synthesis of proteins and other compounds. This is

Life Processes

97

Page_Number 97 ended
/n
Page_Number 98 started
taken up in the form of inorganic nitrates or nitrites. Or it is taken up as
organic compounds which have been prepared by bacteria from
atmospheric nitrogen.

6.2.2 Heterotrophic Nutrition

Each organism is adapted to its environment. The form of nutrition
differs depending on the type and availability of food material as well
as how it is obtained by the organism. For example, whether the food
source is stationary (such as grass) or mobile (such as a deer), would
allow for differences in how the food is accessed and what is the nutritive
apparatus used by a cow and a lion. There is a range of strategies by
which the food is taken in and used by the organism. Some organisms
break-down the food material outside the body and then absorb it.
Examples are fungi like bread moulds, yeast and mushrooms. Others
take in whole material and break it down inside their bodies. What can
be taken in and broken down depends on the body design and
functioning. Some other organisms derive nutrition from plants or
animals without killing them. This parasitic nutritive strategy is used
by a wide variety of organisms like cuscuta (amar-bel), orchids, ticks,
lice, leeches and tape-worms.

6.2.3 How do Organisms obtain their Nutrition?

Since the food and the way it is obtained differ, the digestive system is

Nucleus

7 4 Food particle

(b) -Pseudopodia

{ Food vacuole

co) fears particle

\

(a)

Figure 6.5
Nutrition in Amoeba

different in various organisms. In single-celled organisms, the food
may be taken in by the entire surface. But as the complexity of the
organism increases, different parts become specialised to perform
different functions. For example, Amoeba takes in food using
temporary finger-like extensions of the cell surface which fuse over
the food particle forming a food-vacuole (Fig. 6.5). Inside the food-
vacuole, complex substances are broken down into simpler ones
which then diffuse into the cytoplasm. The remaining undigested
material is moved to the surface of the cell and thrown out. In
Paramoecium, which is also a unicellular organism, the cell has a
definite shape and food is taken in at a specific spot. Food is moved
to this spot by the movement of cilia which cover the entire surface
of the cell.

6.2.4 Nutrition in Human Beings

The alimentary canal is basically a long tube extending from the mouth
to the anus. In Fig. 6.6, we can see that the tube has different parts.
Various regions are specialised to perform different functions. What
happens to the food once it enters our body? We shall discuss this
process here.

98

Science

Page_Number 98 ended
/n
Page_Number 99 started
Activity 6.3

Take 1 mL starch solution (1%) in two test tubes (A and B).

Add 1 mL saliva to test tube A and leave both test tubes undisturbed
for 20-30 minutes.

Now add a few drops of dilute iodine solution to the test tubes.
In which test tube do you observe a colour change?

What does this indicate about the presence or absence of starch
in the two test tubes?

What does this tell us about the action of saliva on starch?

We eat various types of food which has to pass through the same
digestive tract. Naturally the food has to be processed to generate
particles which are small and of the same texture. This is achieved by
crushing the food with our teeth. Since the lining of the canal is soft, the
food is also wetted to make its passage smooth. When we eat something
we like, our mouth ‘waters’. This is actually not only water, but a fluid
called saliva secreted by the salivary glands. Another aspect of the food
we ingest is its complex nature. If it is to be absorbed from the alimentary
canal, it has to be broken into smaller molecules. This is done with the
help of biological catalysts called
enzymes. The saliva contains an
enzyme called salivary amylase that
breaks down starch which is a
complex molecule to give sugar. The Tongue
food is mixed thoroughly with saliva
and moved around the mouth while
chewing by the muscular tongue.

It is necessary to move the food in
aregulated manner along the digestive
tube so that it can be processed
properly in each part. The lining of — Gall bladder
canal has muscles that contract ‘teres Pile)
rhythmically in order to push the food Bile duct
forward. These peristaltic movements
occur all along the gut.

From the mouth, the food is taken
to the stomach through the food-pipe
or oesophagus. The stomach is a large
organ which expands when food
enters it. The muscular walls of the
stomach help in mixing the food
thoroughly with more digestive juices.

These digestion functions are
taken care of by the gastric glands present in the wall of the stomach.
These release hydrochloric acid, a protein digesting enzyme called
pepsin, and mucus. The hydrochloric acid creates an acidic medium
which facilitates the action of the enzyme pepsin. What other function
do you think is served by the acid? The mucus protects the inner lining
of the stomach from the action of the acid under normal conditions. We

Diaphragm

Liver

Life Processes

|
| |

tg ll

Mouth (Buccal cavity)

Stomach

Small
intestine

Figure 6.6 Human alimentary canal

99

Page_Number 99 ended
/n
Page_Number 100 started
have often heard adults complaining about ‘acidity’. Can this be related
to what has been discussed above?

The exit of food from the stomach is regulated by a sphincter muscle
which releases it in small amounts into the small intestine. From the
stomach, the food now enters the small intestine. This is the longest part
of the alimentary canal which is fitted into a compact space because of
extensive coiling. The length of the small intestine differs in various
animals depending on the food they eat. Herbivores eating grass needa
longer small intestine to allow the cellulose to be digested. Meat is easier
to digest, hence carnivores like tigers have a shorter small intestine.

The small intestine is the site of the complete digestion of
carbohydrates, proteins and fats. It receives the secretions of the liver
and pancreas for this purpose. The food coming from the stomach is
acidic and has to be made alkaline for the pancreatic enzymes to act.
Bile juice from the liver accomplishes this in addition to acting on fats.
Fats are present in the intestine in the form of large globules which makes
it difficult for enzymes to act on them. Bile salts break them down into
smaller globules increasing the efficiency of enzyme action. This is similar
to the emulsifying action of soaps on dirt that we have learnt about in
Chapter 4. The pancreas secretes pancreatic juice which contains
enzymes like trypsin for digesting proteins and lipase for breaking down
emulsified fats. The walls of the small intestine contain glands which
secrete intestinal juice. The enzymes present in it finally convert the
proteins to amino acids, complex carbohydrates into glucose and fats
into fatty acids and glycerol.

The digested food is taken up by the walls of the intestine. The inner
lining of the small intestine has numerous finger-like projections called
villi which increase the surface area for absorption. The villi are richly
supplied with blood vessels which take the absorbed food to each and
every cell of the body, where it is utilised for obtaining energy, building
up new tissues and the repair of old tissues.

The unabsorbed food is sent into the large intestine where more villi
absorb water from this material. The rest of the material is removed from
the body via the anus. The exit of this waste material is regulated by the
anal sphincter.

Dental caries

Dental caries or tooth decay causes gradual softening of enamel and dentine. It begins
when bacteria acting on sugars produce acids that softens or demineralises the enamel.

Masses of bacterial cells together with food particles stick to the teeth to form dental
plaque. Saliva cannot reach the tooth surface to neutralise the acid as plaque covers
the teeth. Brushing the teeth after eating removes the plaque before the bacteria
produce acids. If untreated, microorganisms may invade the pulp, causing
inflammation and infection.

More to Know!

100 Science

Page_Number 100 ended
/n
Page_Number 101 started
What are the differences between autotrophic nutrition and heterotrophic
nutrition?
Where do plants get each of the raw materials required for photosynthesis?

What is the role of the acid in our stomach?

What is the function of digestive enzymes?

How is the small intestine designed to absorb digested food?

6.3 RESPIRATION

Pichkari

Activity 6.4 i
“

Take some freshly prepared lime
water in a test tube. Rubber-——> Tube
Blow air through this lime water. tube
Note how long it takes for the lime

water to turn milky.

Use a syringe or pichkari to pass air ; Test tube containing
through some fresh lime water ame lime water

taken in another test tube (Fig. 6.7).

Note how long it takes for this lime

water to tum milky. fa) (b)

What does this tell us about the Figure 6.7

amount of carbon dioxide in the air

inet freee @ {a) Air being passed into lime water with a pichkari/
at we breathe out?

syringe, (b) air being exhaled into lime water

Activity 6.5

Take some fruit juice or sugar solution and add some yeast to
this. Take this mixture in a test tube fitted with a one-holed cork.
Fit the cork with a bent glass tube. Dip the free end of the glass
tube into a test tube containing freshly prepared lime water.
What change is observed in the lime water and how long does it
take for this change to occur?

What does this tell us about the products of fermentation?

We have discussed nutrition in organisms in the last section. The
food material taken in during the process of nutrition is used in cells to
provide energy for various life processes. Diverse organisms do this in
different ways — some use oxygen to break-down glucose completely
into carbon dioxide and water, some use other pathways that do not
involve oxygen (Fig. 6.8). In all cases, the first step is the break-down of
glucose, a six-carbon molecule, into a three-carbon molecule called
pyruvate. This process takes place in the cytoplasm. Further, the
pyruvate may be converted into ethanol and carbon dioxide. This process
takes place in yeast during fermentation. Since this process takes place
in the absence of air (oxygen), it is called anaerobic respiration. Break-
down of pyruvate using oxygen takes place in the mitochondria. This

Life Processes 101

Page_Number 101 ended
/n
Page_Number 102 started
More to Know!

102

process breaks up the three-carbon pyruvate molecule to give three
molecules of carbon dioxide. The other product is water. Since this
process takes place in the presence of air (oxygen), it is called aerobic
respiration. The release of energy in this aerobic process is a lot greater
than in the anaerobic process. Sometimes, when there is a lack of oxygen
in our muscle cells, another pathway for the break-down of pyruvate is
taken. Here the pyruvate is converted into lactic acid which is also a
three-carbon molecule. This build-up of lactic acid in our muscles during
sudden activity causes cramps.

Absence of
oxygen

(in yeast)

Ethanol + Carbon dioxide + Energy
(2-carbon molecule)

In

cytoplasm Lack of oxygen
Glucose —> Pyruvate Gor > Lactic acid + Energy
7 (in ow
occa) mae muscle cells) (3-carbon molecule)
Energy Presence of

oxygen
Carbon dioxide + Water + Energy

(in
mitochondria)

Figure 6.8 Break-down of glucose by various pathways

The energy released during cellular respiration is immediately used
to synthesise a molecule called ATP which is used to fuel all other
activities in the cell. In these processes, ATP is broken down giving rise
to a fixed amount of energy which can drive the endothermic reactions
taking place in the cell.

ATP is the energy currency for most cellular processes. The energy released during
the process of respiration is used to make an ATP molecule from ADP and inorganic
phosphate.

ADP+® 22“2Y, app~® = ATP

®: Phosphate

Endothenmic processes in the cell then use this ATP to drive the reactions. When the
terminal phosphate linkage in ATP is broken using water, the energy equivalent to
30.5 kJ/mol is released.

Think of how a battery can provide energy for many different kinds of uses. It can be
used to obtain mechanical energy, light energy, electrical energy and so on. Similarly,
ATP can be used in the cells for the contraction of muscles, protein synthesis,
conduction of nervous impulses and many other activities.

Since the aerobic respiration pathway depends on oxygen, aerobic
organisms need to ensure that there is sufficient intake of oxygen. We
have seen that plants exchange gases through stomata, and the large
inter-cellular spaces ensure that all cells are in contact with air. Carbon
dioxide and oxygen are exchanged by diffusion here. They can go into

Science

Page_Number 102 ended
/n
Page_Number 103 started
cells, or away from them and out into the air. The direction of diffusion
depends upon the environmental conditions and the requirements of
the plant. At night, when there is no photosynthesis occurring, CO,
elimination is the major exchange activity going on. During the day,
CO, generated during respiration is used up for photosynthesis, hence
there is no CO, release. Instead, oxygen release is the major event at
this time.

Animals have evolved different organs for the uptake of oxygen
from the environment and for getting rid of the carbon dioxide
produced. Terrestrial animals can breathe the oxygen in the
atmosphere, but animals that live in water need to use the oxygen
dissolved in water.

Activity 6.6

Observe fish in an aquarium. They open and close their mouths
and the gill-slits (or the operculum which covers the gill-slits)
behind their eyes also open and close. Are the timings of the
opening and closing of the mouth and gill-slits coordinated in some
manner?

Count the number of times the fish opens and closes its mouth in
a minute.

Compare this to the number of times you breathe in and out in a
minute.

Since the amount of dissolved oxygen is fairly low compared to the
amount of oxygen in the air, the rate of breathing in aquatic organisms
is much faster than that seen in terrestrial organisms. Fishes take in
waiter through their mouths and force it past the gills where the dissolved
oxygen is taken up by blood.

Terrestrial organisms use the oxygen in the atmosphere for
respiration. This oxygen is absorbed by different organs in different
animals. All these organs have a structure that increases the surface
area which is in contact with the oxygen-rich atmosphere. Since the
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide has to take place across this
surface, this surface is very fine and delicate. In order to protect this
surface, it is usually placed within the body, so there have to be passages
that will take air to this area. In addition, there is a mechanism for moving
the air in and out of this area where the oxygen is absorbed.

In human beings (Fig. 6.9), air is taken into the body through the
nostrils. The air passing through the nostrils is filtered by fine hairs that
line the passage. The passage is also lined with mucus which helps in
this process. From here, the air passes through the throat and into the
lungs. Rings of cartilage are present in the throat. These ensure that the
air-passage does not collapse.

Life Processes

103

Page_Number 103 ended
/n
Page_Number 104 started
104

Nasal passage

Diaphragm
Alveolar sac phrag

Figure 6.9 Human respiratory system

Within the lungs, the passage divides into smaller and smaller tubes
which finally terminate in balloon-like structures which are called
alveoli. The alveoli provide a surface where the exchange of gases can
take place. The walls of the alveoli contain an extensive network of
blood-vessels. As we have seen in earlier years, when we breathe in, we
lift our ribs and flatten our diaphragm, and the chest cavity becomes
larger as a result. Because of this, air is sucked into the lungs and fills
the expanded alveoli. The blood brings carbon dioxide from the rest of
the body for release into the alveoli, and the oxygen in the alveolar air
is taken up by blood in the alveolar blood vessels to be transported to
all the cells in the body. During the breathing cycle, when air is taken
in and let out, the lungs always contain a residual volume of air so
that there is sufficient time for oxygen to be absorbed and for the carbon
dioxide to be released.

When the body size of animals is large, the diffusion pressure alone
cannot take care of oxygen delivery to all parts of the body. Instead,
respiratory pigments take up oxygen from the air in the lungs and carry
it to tissues which are deficient in oxygen before releasing it. In human
beings, the respiratory pigment is haemoglobin which has a very high
affinity for oxygen. This pigment is present in the red blood corpuscles.
Carbon dioxide is more soluble in water than oxygen is and hence is
mostly transported in the dissolved form in our blood.

Science

Page_Number 104 ended
/n
Page_Number 105 started
If the alveolar surface were spread out, it would cover about 80 m?. How much
do you think the surface area of your body is? Consider how efficient exchange
of gases becomes because of the large surface available for the exchange to take
place.

If diffusion were to move oxygen in our body, it is estimated that it would take 3
years for a molecule of oxygen to get to our toes from our lungs. Aren't you glad
that we have haemoglobin?

What advantage over an aquatic organism does a terrestrial organism
have with regard to obtaining oxygen for respiration?

What are the different ways in which glucose is oxidised to provide
energy in various organisms’?

How is oxygen and carbon dioxide transported in human beings?

How are the lungs designed in human beings to maximise the area for
exchange of gases?

6.4 TRANSPORTATION

6.4.1 Transportation in Human Beings

Activity 6.7

Visit a health centre in your locality and find out what is the
normal range of haemoglobin content in human beings.

Is it the same for children and adults?

Is there any difference in the haemoglobin levels for men and
women’?

Visit a veterinary clinic in your locality. Find out what is the normal
range of haemoglobin content in an animal like the buffalo
or cow.

Is this content different in calves, male and female animals?
Compare the difference seen in male and female human beings
and animals.

How would the difference, if any, be explained?

We have seen in previous sections that blood transports food, oxygen
and waste materials in our bodies. In Class IX, we learnt about blood
being a fluid connective tissue. Blood consists of a fluid medium called
plasma in which the cells are suspended. Plasma transports food, carbon
dioxide and nitrogenous wastes in dissolved form. Oxygen is carried by
the red blood cells. Many other substances like salts, are also transported
by the blood. We thus need a pumping organ to push blood around the
body, a network of tubes to reach all the tissues and a system in place to
ensure that this network can be repaired if damaged.

Life Processes

105

Page_Number 105 ended
/n
Page_Number 106 started
Our pump — the heart

‘Aorta The heart is a muscular organ which is

Vena Cava:
from upper.

body 7 | {

Right atrium

Vena Cava
from lower
body
Right
ventricle

Septum
(dividing wall)

Figure 6.10
Sectional view of the
human heart

Pulmonary
artery to lungs

‘Vena cava
from body

Capillaries in . . a .
body organs apart animals, like amphibians or many reptiles have

from the lungs

Figure 6.11

as big as our fist (Fig. 6.10). Because
both oxygen and carbon dioxide have to
be transported by the blood, the heart
Pulmonary veins has different chambers to prevent the
oxygen-rich blood from mixing with the
Left atrium blood containing carbon dioxide. The
carbon dioxide-rich blood has to reach
the lungs for the carbon dioxide to be
removed, and the oxygenated blood from
the lungs has to be brought back to the
heart. This oxygen-rich blood is then
pumped to the rest of the body.

We can follow this process step by
step (Fig. 6.11). Oxygen-rich blood from
the lungs comes to the thin-walled upper
chamber of the heart on the left, the left atrium. The left atrium relaxes
when it is collecting this blood. It then contracts, while the next chamber,
the left ventricle, expands, so that the blood is transferred to it. When the
muscular left ventricle contracts in its turn, the blood is pumped out to
the body. De-oxygenated blood comes from the body to the upper
chamber on the right, the right atrium, as it expands. As the right atrium
contracts, the corresponding lower chamber, the right ventricle, dilates.
This transfers blood to the right ventricle, which in turn pumps it to the
lungs for oxygenation. Since ventricles have to pump blood into various
organs, they have thicker muscular walls than the atria do. Valves ensure
that blood does not flow backwards when the atria or ventricles contract.

Pulmonary arteries

‘Left ventricle

Oxygen enters the blood in the lungs
The separation of the right side and the left side of
Pulmonary vein the heart is useful to keep oxygenated and de-
from lungs oxygenated blood from mixing. Such separation
allows a highly efficient supply of oxygen to the
body. This is useful in animals that have high
energy needs, such as birds and mammals, which
constantly use energy to maintain their body
Aorta to temperature. In animals that do not use energy
for this purpose, the body temperature depends
on the temperature in the environment. Such

three-chambered hearts, and tolerate some mixing
of the oxygenated and de-oxygenated blood
streams. Fishes, on the other hand, have only two
chambers to their hearts, and the blood is pumped
to the gills, is oxygenated there, and passes directly

Schematic representation of transportand exchange to the rest of the body. Thus, blood goes only once
of oxygen and carbon dioxide through the heart in the fish during one cycle of

106

passage through the body. On the other hand, it goes through the heart
twice during each cycle in other vertebrates. This is known as double
circulation.

Science

Page_Number 106 ended
/n
Page_Number 107 started
Blood pressure

The force that blood exerts against the wall of a vessel is called blood pressure. This
pressure is much greater in arteries than in veins. The pressure of blood inside the
artery during ventricular systole (contraction) is called systolic pressure and pressure
in artery during ventricular diastole (relaxation) is called diastolic pressure. The normal
systolic pressure is about 120 mm of Hg and diastolic pressure is 80 mm of Hg.

Blood

pressure 120/80

(120 systolic,

80 diastolic) Pressure Pressure Pressure

(to be measured) in cuff fin Ne? in cuff
above 120 below 120 below 80

Rubber cuff 120
inflated
with air

audible in
stethoscope

Blood pressure is measured with an instrument called sphygmomanometer. High
blood pressure is also called hypertension and is caused by the constriction of
arterioles, which results in increased resistance to blood flow. It can lead to the rupture
of an artery and internal bleeding.

The tubes — blood vessels

Arteries are the vessels which carry blood away from the heart to various
organs of the body. Since the blood emerges from the heart under high
pressure, the arteries have thick, elastic walls. Veins collect the blood
from different organs and bring it back to the heart. They do not need
thick walls because the blood is no longer under pressure, instead they
have valves that ensure that the blood flows only in one direction.

On reaching an organ or tissue, the artery divides into smaller and
smaller vessels to bring the blood in contact with all the individual cells.
The smallest vessels have walls which are one-cell thick and are called
capillaries. Exchange of material between the blood and surrounding
cells takes place across this thin wall. The capillaries then join together
to form veins that convey the blood away from the organ or tissue.

Maintenance by platelets

What happens if this system of tubes develops a leak? Think about
situations when we are injured and start bleeding. Naturally the loss of
blood from the system has to be minimised. In addition, leakage would
lead to a loss of pressure which would reduce the efficiency of the

Life Processes 107

Page_Number 107 ended
/n
Page_Number 108 started
108

pumping system. To avoid this, the blood has platelet cells which circulate
around the body and plug these leaks by helping to clot the blood at
these points of injury.

Lymph

There is another type of fluid also involved in transportation. This is
called lymph or tissue fluid. Through the pores present in the walls of
capillaries some amount of plasma, proteins and blood cells escape into
intercellular spaces in the tissues to form the tissue fluid or lymph. It is
similar to the plasma of blood but colourless and contains less protein.
Lymph drains into lymphatic capillaries from the intercellular spaces,
which join to form large lymph vessels that finally open into larger veins.
Lymph carries digested and absorbed fat from intestine and drains excess
fluid from extra cellular space back into the blood.

6.4.2 Transportation in Plants

We have discussed earlier how plants take in simple compounds such
as CO, and photosynthesise energy stored in their chlorophyll-containing
organs, namely leaves. The other kinds of raw materials needed for
building plant bodies will also have to be taken up separately. For plants,
the soil is the nearest and richest source of raw materials like nitrogen,
phosphorus and other minerals. The absorption of these substances
therefore occurs through the part in contact with the soil, namely roots.
If the distances between soil-contacting organs and chlorophyll-
containing organs are small, energy and raw materials can easily diffuse
to all parts of the plant body. But ifthese distances become large because
of changes in plant body design, diffusion processes will not be sufficient
to provide raw material in leaves and energy in roots. A proper system of
transportation is therefore essential in such situations.

Energy needs differ between different body designs. Plants do not
move, and plant bodies have a large proportion of dead cells in many
tissues. As a result, plants have low energy needs, and can use relatively
slow transport systems. The distances over which transport systems
have to operate, however, can be very large in plants such as very tall
trees.

Plant transport systems will move energy stores from leaves and raw
materials from roots. These two pathways are constructed as
independently organised conducting tubes. One, the xylem moves water
and minerals obtained from the soil. The other, phloem transports
products of photosynthesis from the leaves where they are synthesised
to other parts of the plant. We have studied the structure of these tissues
in detail in Class IX.

Transport of water

In xylem tissue, vessels and tracheids of the roots, stems and leaves are
interconnected to form a continuous system of water-conducting
channels reaching all parts of the plant. At the roots, cells in contact
with the soil actively take up ions. This creates a difference in the
concentration of these ions between the root and the soil. Water, therefore,

Science

Page_Number 108 ended
/n
Page_Number 109 started
moves into the root from the soil to eliminate this difference. This means
that there is steady movement of water into root xylem, creating a column
of water that is steadily pushed upwards.

However, this pressure by itself is unlikely to be enough to move
water over the heights that we commonly see in plants. Plants use another
strategy to move water in the xylem upwards to the highest points of the
plant body.

Activity 6.8

Take two small pots of approximately the same size and having
the same amount of soil. One should have a plant in it. Place a
stick of the same height as the plant in the other pot.

Cover the soil in both pots with a plastic sheet so that moisture
cannot escape by evaporation.

Cover both sets, one with the plant and the other with the stick,
with plastic sheets and place in bright sunlight for half an hour.
Do you observe any difference in the two cases?

Provided that the plant has an adequate
supply of water, the water which is lost through the
stomata is replaced by water from the xylem vessels
in the leaf. In fact, evaporation of water molecules from
the cells of a leaf creates a suction which pulls water vapour
from the xylem cells of roots. The loss of water in the
form of vapour from the aerial parts of the plant is
known as transpiration. -

Thus, transpiration helps in the absorption and
upward movement of water and minerals dissolved

eS = _
in it from roots to the leaves. It also helps in 7, g X
temperature regulation. The effect of root pressure in i

transport of water is more important at night. During
the day when the stomata are open, the transpiration
pull becomes the major driving force in the movement Figure 6.12
of water in the xylem. Movement of water during transpiration in a tree

Transport of food and other substances
So far we have discussed the transport of water and minerals in plants.
Now let us consider how the products of metabolic processes, particularly
photosynthesis, are moved from leaves, where they are formed, to other
parts of the plant. This transport of soluble products of photosynthesis
is called translocation and it occurs in the part of the vascular tissue
known as phloem. Besides the products of photosynthesis, the phloem
transports amino acids and other substances. These substances are
especially delivered to the storage organs of roots, fruits and seeds and
to growing organs. The translocation of food and other substances takes
place in the sieve tubes with the help of adjacent companion cells both
in upward and downward directions.

Unlike transport in xylem which can be largely explained by simple
physical forces, the translocation in phloem is achieved by utilising

Life Processes 109

Page_Number 109 ended
/n
Page_Number 110 started
energy. Material like sucrose is transferred into phloem tissue using
energy from ATP. This increases the osmotic pressure of the tissue
causing water to move into it. This pressure moves the material in the
phloem to tissues which have less pressure. This allows the phloem to
move material according to the plant’s needs. For example, in the spring,
sugar stored in root or stem tissue would be transported to the buds
which need energy to grow.

QU ES TION S

What are the components of the transport system in human beings?
What are the functions of these components?

Why is it necessary to separate oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in
mammals and birds?

What are the components of the transport system in highly organised
plants?

How are water and minerals transported in plants?
How is food transported in plants?

6.5 EXCRETION

We have already discussed how organisms get rid of gaseous wastes
generated during photosynthesis or respiration. Other metabolic activities
generate nitrogenous materials which need to be removed. The biological
process involved in the removal of these harmful metabolic wastes from
the body is called excretion. Different organisms use varied strategies to
do this. Many unicellular organisms remove these wastes by simple

diffusion from the body surface into the surrounding
Tenvenal water. As we have seen in other processes, complex
artery multi-cellular organisms use specialised organs to
perform the same function.

tet kidney 6.5.1 Excretion in Human Beings

Left renal vein

The excretory system of human beings (Fig. 6.13)
Aorta includes a pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters, a urinary
Left ureter bladder and a urethra. Kidneys are located in the
Veuve abdomen, one on either side of the backbone. Urine

produced in the kidneys passes through the ureters
Urinary bladder into the urinary bladder where it is stored until it is
released through the urethra.

How is urine produced? The purpose of making
urine is to filter out waste products from the blood.
Just as co, is removed from the blood in the lungs,
nitrogenous waste such as urea or uric acid are
Figure 6.13 removed from blood in the kidneys. It is then no
Excretory system in human beings surprise that the basic filtration unit in the kidneys,

Urethra

110 Science

Page_Number 110 ended
/n
Page_Number 111 started
like in the lungs, is a cluster of very thin-walled blood
capillaries. Each capillary cluster in the kidney is
associated with the cup-shaped end of a tube that
collects the filtered urine (Fig. 6.14). Each kidney has
large numbers of these filtration units called nephrons
packed close together. Some substances in the initial
filtrate, such as glucose, amino acids, salts and a major
amount of water, are selectively re-absorbed as the
urine flows along the tube. The amount of water re-
absorbed depends on how much excess water there is
in the body, and on how much of dissolved waste there
is to be excreted. The urine forming in each kidney
eventually enters a long tube, the ureter, which
connects the kidneys with the urinary bladder. Urine
is stored in the urinary bladder until the pressure of
the expanded bladder leads to the urge to pass it out
through the urethra. The bladder is muscular, so it is
under nervous control, as we have discussed elsewhere.
As a result, we can usually control the urge to urinate.

Glomerulus
Bowmans
capsule

Tubular part of
nephron
Branch
of renal
artery

Renal
artery

Branch of
renal vein

:)

duct

2
ye

Figure 6.14

4 Ye —— Collecting

Structure of anephron

Artificial kidney (Hemodialysis)
Kidneys are vital organs for survival. Several factors like infections, injury or restricted
blood flow to kidneys reduce the activity of kidneys. This leads to accumulation of
poisonous wastes in the body, which can even lead to death. In case of kidney
failure, an artificial kidney can be used. An artificial kidney is a device to remove
nitrogenous waste products from the blood through dialysis.

Artificial kidneys contain a number of tubes with

Line from artery
topump —_ Tubing made of a
selectively permeable

membrane

More to Know!

Dialysing JU

Line from "
solution

apparatus

Used dialysing
solution (with
urea and
excess salts)

dialysing
solution

Life Processes

asemi-permeable lining, suspended
in a tank filled with dialysing fluid.
This fluid has the same osmotic
pressure as blood, except that it is
devoid of nitrogenous wastes. The
patient's blood is passed through
these tubes. During this passage,
the waste products from the blood
pass into dialysing fluid by diffusion.
The purified blood is pumped back
into the patient. This is similar to the
function of the kidney, but it is
different since there is no re-
absorption involved. Normally, ina
healthy adult, the initial filtrate in the
kidneys is about 180 L daily.
However, the volume actually
excreted is only a litre or two a day,
because the remaining filtrate is re-
absorbed in the kidney tubules.

111

Page_Number 111 ended
/n
Page_Number 112 started
6.5.2 Excretion in Plants

Plants use completely different strategies for excretion than those of
animals. Oxygen itself can be thought of as a waste product generated
during photosynthesis! We have discussed earlier how plants deal with
oxygen as well as CO,. They can get rid of excess water by transpiration.
For other wastes, plants use the fact that many of their tissues consist of
dead cells, and that they can even lose some parts such as leaves. Many
plant waste products are stored in cellular vacuoles. Waste products
may be stored in leaves that fall off. Other waste products are stored as
resins and gums, especially in old xylem. Plants also excrete some waste
substances into the soil around them.

Q U ES TION S

Describe the structure and functioning of nephrons.

What are the methods used by plants to get rid of excretory products?

How is the amount of urine produced regulated?

= Movement of various types can be taken as an indication of life.

= The maintenance of life requires processes like nutrition, respiration, transport of
materials within the body and excretion of waste products.

= Autotrophic nutrition involves the intake of simple inorganic materials from the
environment and using an external energy source like the Sun to synthesise complex
high-energy organic material.

=  Heterotrophic nutrition involves the intake of complex material prepared by other
organisms.

= In human beings, the food eaten is broken down by various steps along the
alimentary canal and the digested food is absorbed in the small intestine to be sent
to all cells in the body.

= During the process of respiration, complex organic compounds such as glucose
are broken down to provide energy in the form of ATP. ATP is used to provide
energy for other reactions in the cell.

= Respiration may be aerobic or anaerobic. Aerobic respiration makes more energy
available to the organism.

= Inhuman beings, the transport of materials such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, food
and excretory products is a function of the circulatory system. The circulatory
system consists of the heart, blood and blood vessels.

: In highly differentiated plants, transport of water, minerals, food and other materials
is a function of the vascular tissue which consists of xylem and phloem.

112 Science

Page_Number 112 ended
/n
Page_Number 113 started
In human beings, excretory products in the form of soluble nitrogen compounds
are removed by the nephrons in the kidneys.

Plants use a variety of techniques to get rid of waste material. For example, waste
material may be stored in the cell-vacuoles or as gum and resin, removed in the
falling leaves, or excreted into the surrounding soil.

EX ERC S ES

The kidneys in human beings are a part of the system for
(a) nutrition.

(b) respiration.

(c) excretion.

(d) transportation.

The xylem in plants are responsible for

(a) transport of water.

(b) transport of food.

(c) transport of amino acids.

(d) transport of oxygen.

The autotrophic mode of nutrition requires

(a) carbon dioxide and water.

(b) chlorophyll.

(c) sunlight.

(d) all of the above.

The breakdown of pyruvate to give carbon dioxide, water and energy takes place in
(a) cytoplasm.

(b) mitochondria.

(c) chloroplast.

(d) nucleus.

How are fats digested in our bodies? Where does this process take place?
What is the role of saliva in the digestion of food?

What are the necessary conditions for autotrophic nutrition and what are its by-
products?

What are the differences between aerobic and anaerobic respiration? Name some
organisms that use the anaerobic mode of respiration.

How are the alveoli designed to maximise the exchange of gases?
. What would be the consequences of a deficiency of haemoglobin in our bodies?
Describe double circulation in human beings. Why is it necessary?

. What are the differences between the transport of materials in xylem and phloem?

Compare the functioning of alveoli in the lungs and nephrons in the kidneys with
respect to their structure and functioning.

Life Processes 113

Page_Number 113 ended
/n
Page_Number 114 started
CHAPTER 7

Control and
© Coordination

n the previous chapter, we looked at life processes involved in the

maintenance functions in living organisms. There, we had started with
anotion we all have, that ifwe see something moving, it is alive. Some of
these movements are in fact the result of growth, as in plants. A seed
germinates and grows, and we can see that the seedling moves over the
course of a few days, it pushes soil aside and comes out. But ifits growth
were to be stopped. these movements would not happen. Some
movements, as in many animals and some plants, are not connected
with growth. A cat running, children playing on swings, buffaloes
chewing cud — these are not movements caused by growth.

Why do we associate such visible movements with life? A possible
answer is that we think of movement as a response to a change in the
environment of the organism. The cat may be running because it has
seena mouse, Not only that, we also think of movement as an attempt
by living organisms to use changes in their environment to their
advantage. Plants grow out into the sunshine. Children try to get pleasure
and fun out of swinging. Buffaloes chew cud to help break up tough
jfood so as to be able to digest it better. When bright light is focussed on
our eyes or when we touch a hot object, we detect the change and respond
to it with movement in order to protect ourselves.

If we think a bit more about this, it becomes apparent that all this
movement, in response to the environment, is carefully controlled. Each
kind of a change in the envirormnent evokes an appropriate movement
in response. When we want to talk to our friends in class, we whisper,
rather than shouting loudly. Clearly. the movement to be made depends
on the event that is triggering it. Therefore, such controlled movement
must be connected to the recognition of various events in the
environment, followed by only the correct movement in response. In other
words, living organisms must use systems providing control and
coordination. In keeping with the general principles of body organisation
in multicellular organisms, specialised tissues are used to provide these
control and coordination activities.

7.1 ANIMALS — NERVOUS SYSTEM

In animals, such control and coordination are provided by nervous and
muscular tissues, which we have studied in Class LX. Touching a hot

Page_Number 114 ended
/n
Page_Number 115 started
object is an urgent and dangerous
situation for us. We need to detect it,
and respond to it. How do we detect that
we are touching a hot object? All
information from our environment is
detected by the specialised tips of some
nerve cells. These receptors are usually
located in our sense organs, such as the
inner ear, the nose, the tongue, and so
on. So gustatory receptors will detect taste
while olfactory receptors will detect smell.

This information, acquired at the
end of the dendritic tip of a nerve cell
[Fig. 7.1 (a}], sets offa chemical reaction
that creates an electrical impulse. This
impulse travels from the dendrite to the
cell body, and then along the axon to its
end. At the end of the axon, the electrical
impulse sets off the release of some
chemicals. These chemicals cross the
gap, or synapse, and start a similar
electrical impulse in a dendrite of the next
neuron. This is a general scheme of how
nervous impulses travel in the body. A

Nucleus

Cell body
(a

Neuromuscular
junction

Mitochondrion

Figure 7.1 (a) Structure of neuron, (b) Neuromuscularjunction

similar synapse finally allows delivery of such impulses from neurons to
other cells, such as muscles cells or gland [Fig. 7.1 (b)].

Itis thus no surprise that nervous tissue is made up of an organised
network of nerve cells or neurons, and is specialised for conducting
information via electrical impulses from one part of the body to another.

Look at Fig. 7.1 (a) and identify the parts of a neuron (i) where
information is acquired, (ii) through which information travels as an
electrical impulse, and (iii) where this impulse must be converted into a

chemical signal for onward transmission.

Activity 7.1

Put some sugar in your mouth. How does it taste?

Block your nose by pressing it between your thumb and index
finger. Now eat sugar again. Is there any difference in its taste?

While eating lunch, block your nose in the sare way and notice if
you can fully appreciate the taste of the food you are eating.

Is there a difference in how sugar and food taste if your nose is
blocked? If so, why might this be happening? Read and talk about
possible explanations for these kinds of differences. Do you come across

a similar situation when you have a cold?

Control and Coordination

11

Page_Number 115 ended
/n
Page_Number 116 started
11

7.1.1 What happens in Reflex Actions?

‘Reflex’ is a word we use very commonly when we talk about some sudden
action in response to something in the environment. We say ‘I jumped
out of the way of the bus reflexly’, or ‘I pulled my hand back from the
flame reflexly’, or ‘Iwas so hungry my mouth started watering reflexly’.
What exactly do we mean? A common idea in all such examples is that
we do something without thinking about it, or without feeling in control
of our reactions. Yet these are situations where we are responding with
some action to changes in our environment. How is control and
coordination achieved in such situations?

Let us consider this further. Take one of our examples. Touching a
flame is an urgent and dangerous situation for us, or in fact, for any
animal! How would we respond to this? One seemingly simple way is to
think consciously about the pain and the possibility of getting burnt,
and therefore move our hand. An important question then is, how long
will it take us to think all this? The answer depends on how we think. If
nerve impulses are sent around the way we have talked about earlier,
then thinking is also likely to involve the creation of such impulses.
Thinking is a complex activity, so it is bound to involve a complicated
interaction of many nerve impulses from many neurons.

If this is the case, it is no surprise that the thinking tissue in our
body consists of dense networks of intricately arranged neurons. It sits
in the forward end of the skull, and receives signals from all over the
body which it thinks about before responding to them. Obviously, in
order to receive these signals, this thinking part of the brain in the skull
must be connected to nerves coming from various parts of the body.
Similarly, if this part of the brain is to instruct muscles to move, nerves
must carry this signal back to different parts of the body. If all of this is
to be done when we touch a hot object, it may take enough time for us to
get burnt!

How does the design of the body solve this problem? Rather than
having to think about the sensation of heat, ifthe nerves that detect heat
were to be connected to the nerves that move muscles in a simpler way,
the process of detecting the signal or the input and responding to it by
an output action might be completed quickly. Such a connection is
commonly called a reflex arc (Fig. 7.2). Where should such reflex arc
connections be made between the input nerve and the output nerve?
The best place, of course, would be at the point where they first meet
each other. Nerves from all over the body meet in a bundle in the spinal
cord on their way to the brain. Reflex arcs are formed in this spinal cord
itself, although the information input also goes on to reach the brain.

Of course, reflex arcs have evolved in animals because the thinking
process of the brain is not fast enough. In fact many animals have very
little or none of the complex neuron network needed for thinking. So it is
quite likely that reflex arcs have evolved as efficient ways of functioning
in the absence of true thought processes. However, even after complex
neuron networks have come into existence, reflex arcs continue to be
more efficient for quick responses.

Science

Page_Number 116 ended
/n
Page_Number 117 started
Spinal cord

(CNS)

Sensory neuron.
Motor
neuron

Receptors = Heat/Pain Relay neuron.

Receptors in skin .
Effector = Muscle in arm

Figure 7.2 Reflex arc

Can you now trace the sequence of events which occur when a bright
light is focussed on your eyes?

7.1.2 Human Brain

Is reflex action the only function of the spinal cord? Obviously not, since
we know that we are thinking beings. Spinal cord is made up of nerves
which supply information to think about. Thinking involves more
complex mechanisms and neural connections. These are concentrated
in the brain, which is the main coordinating centre of the body. The
brain and spinal cord constitute the central nervous system. They receive
information from all parts of the body and integrate it.

We also think about our actions. Writing, talking, moving a chair,
clapping at the end of a programme are examples of voluntary actions
which are based on deciding what to do next. So, the brain also has to
send messages to muscles. This is the second way in which the nervous
system communicates with the muscles. The communication between
the central nervous system and the other parts of the body is facilitated
by the peripheral nervous system consisting of cranial nerves arising
Jrom the brain and spinal nerves arising from the spinal cord. The brain
thus allows us to third and take actions based on that thinking. As you
will expect, this is accomplished through a complex design, with different
parts of the brain responsible for integrating different inputs and outputs.
The brain has three such major parts or regions, namely the fore-brain,
mid-brain and hind-brain.

The fore-brain is the main thinking part of the brain. It has regions
which receive sensory impulses from various receptors. Separate areas
of the fore-brain are specialised for hearing, smell, sight and soon. There
are separate areas of association where this sensory information is
interpreted by putting it together with information from other receptors
as wellas with information that is already stored in the brain. Based on

Control and Coordination

Message to
brain

A

11

Page_Number 117 ended
/n
Page_Number 118 started
11

Fore-Brain

all this, a decision is made about how to respond and the information is
passed on to the motor areas which control the movement of voluntary
muscles, for example, our leg muscles. However, certain sensations are
distinct from seeing or hearing, for example, how do we know that we
have eaten enough? The sensation of feeling full is because of a centre
associated with hunger, which is in a separate part of the fore-brain.

Mid-brain

Pituitary gland

Hind-brain
Cerebellum

Figure 7.3 Human brain

Study the labelled diagram of the human brain. We have seen that
the different parts have specific functions. Can we find out the function
of each part?

Let us look at the other use of the word ‘reflex’ that we have talked
about in the introduction. Our mouth waters when we see food we like
without our meaning to. Our hearts beat without our thinking about it.
In fact, we cannot control these actions easily by thinking about them
even if we wanted to, Do we have to think about or remember to breathe
or digest food? So, in between the simple reflex actions like change in
the size of the pupil, and the thought out actions such as moving a
chair, there is another set of muscle movements over which we do not
have any thinking control. Many of these involuntary actions are
controlled by the mid-brain and hind-brain. All these involuntary actions
including blood pressure, salivation and vomiting are controlled by the
medulla in the hind-brain.

Think about activities like walking in a straight line, riding a bicycle,
picking up a pencil. These are possible due to a part of the hind-brain
called the cerebellum. It is responsible for precision of voluntary actions
and maintaining the posture and balance of the body. Imagine what
would happen if each of these events failed to take place if we were not
thinking about it.

Science

Page_Number 118 ended
/n
Page_Number 119 started
7.1.3 How are these Tissues protected?

A delicate organ like the brain, which is so important for a variety of
activities, needs to be carefully protected. For this, the body is designed
so that the brain sits inside a bony box. Inside the box, the brain is
contained in a fluid-filled balloon which provides further shock
absorption. If you run your hand down the middle of your back, you
will feel a hard, bumpy structure. This is the vertebral column or
backbone which protects the spinal cord.

7.1.4 How does the Nervous Tissue cause Action?

So far, we have been talking about nervous tissue, and how it collects
information, sends it around the body, processes information, makes
decisions based on information, and conveys decisions to muscles for
action. In other words, when the action or movement is to be performed,
muscle tissue will do the finaljob. How do animal muscles move? When
anerve impulse reaches the muscle, the muscle fibre must move. How
does a muscle cell move? The simplest notion of movement at the cellular
level is that muscle cells will move by changing their shape so that they
shorten. So the next question is. how do muscle cells change their shape?
The answer must lie in the chemistry of cellular components. Muscle
cells have special proteins that change both their shape and their
arrangement in the cell in response to nervous electrical impulses. When
this happens, new arrangements of these proteins give the muscle cells
a shorter form. Remember when we talked about muscle tissue in
Class IX, there were different kinds of muscles, such as voluntary muscles
and involuntary muscles. Based on what we have discussed so far, what
do you think the differences between these would be?

Q U ES TION S$

What is the difference between a reflex action and walking?
What happens at the synapse between two neurons?
Which part of the brain maintains posture and equilibrium of the body?

How do we detect the smell ef an agarbaiti (incense stick)?

What is the role of the brain in reflex action?

7.2 COORDINATION IN PLANTS

Animals have a nervous system for controlling and coordinating the
activities of the body. But plants have neither a nervous system nor
muscles. So, how do they respond to stimuli? When we touch the leaves
of a chhui-mui (the ‘sensitive’ or ‘touch-me-not’ plant of the Mimosa
Jamily), they begin to fold up and droop. When a seed germinates, the
root goes down, the stem comes up into the air. What happens? Firstly,
the leaves of the sensitive plant move very quickly in response to touch.

Control and Coordination 11

Page_Number 119 ended
/n
Page_Number 120 started
There is no growth involved in this movement. On the other hand, the
directional movement of a seedling is caused by growth. Ifit is prevented
Jrom growing, it will not show any movement. So plants show two different
types of movement — one dependent on growth and the other independent
of growth.

7.2.1 Immediate Response to Stimulus

Let us think about the first kind of movement, such as that of the sensitive
plant. Since no growth is involved. the plant must actually move its leaves
in response to touch. But there is no nervous tissue, nor any muscle
tissue. How does the plant detect the touch, and how do the leaves move
in response?

Figure 7.4 The sensitive plant

If we think about where exactly the plant is touched, and what part
of the plant actually moves, it is apparent that movement happens at a
point different from the point of touch. So, information that a touch has
occurred must be communicated. The plants also use electrical-chemical
means to convey this information from cell to cell, but unlike in animals,
there is no specialised tissue in plants for the conduction of information.
Finally, again as in animals, some cells must change shape in order for
movement to happen. Instead of the specialised proteins found in animal
muscle cells, plant cells change shape by changing the amount of water
in them, resulting in swelling or shrinking, and therefore in changing
shapes.

7.2.2 Movement Due to Growth

Some plants like the pea plant climb up other plants or fences by means
of tendrils. These tendrils are sensitive to touch. When they come in
contact with any support, the part of the tendril in contact with the object
does not grow as rapidly as the part of the tendril away from the object.
This causes the tendril to circle around the object and thus cling to it.
More commonly, plants respond to stimuli slowly by growing in a
particular direction. Because this growth is directional, it appears as if
the plant is moving. Let us understand this type of movement with the
help of an example.

Science

Page_Number 120 ended
/n
Page_Number 121 started
Activity 7.2

Fill a conical flask with water.

Cover the neck of the flask with a wire mesh.
Keep two or three freshly germinated bean
seeds on the wire mesh.

Take a cardboard box which is open from one
side.

Keep the flask in the box in such a manner
that the open side of the box faces light coming
from a window (Fig. 7.5).

After two or three days, you will notice that
the shoots bend towards light and roots away
Jrom light.

Now turn the flask so that the shoots are away
Jrom light and the roots towards light. Leave it
undisturbed in this condition for a few days.

Have the old parts of the shoot and root
changed direction?

Are there differences in the direction of the new
growth?

What can we conclude from this activity?

Figure 7.5
Response of the plant to the direction of light

Environmental triggers such as light. or gravity
will change the directions that plant parts grow in.
These directional, or tropic, movements can be either
towards the stimulus, or away from it. So, in two
different kinds of phototropic movement, shoots
respond by bending towards light while roots

Positively
geotropic

v ati
bby Negatively

geotropic

respond by bending away from it. How does this help Figure 7.6 Plant showing geotropism

the plant?

Plants show tropism in response to other stimuli as well. The roots
of a plant always grow downwards while the shoots usually grow
upwards and away from the earth. This upward and downward growth
of shoots and roots, respectively, in response to the pull of earth or gravity
is, obviously, geotropism (Fig. 7.6). If ‘hydro’ means water and ‘chemo’
refers to chemicals, what would ‘hydrotropism’ and ‘chemotropism’
mean? Can we think of examples of these kinds of directional growth
movements? One example of chemotropism is the growth of pollen tubes
towards ovules, about which we will learn more when we examine the
reproductive processes of living organisms.

Let us now once again think about how information is communicated
in the bodies of multicellular organisms. The movement of the
sensitive plant in response to touch is very quick. The movement of
sunflowers in response to day or night, on the other hand, is quite slow.
Growth-related movement of plants will be even slower.

Even in animal bodies, there are carefully controlled directions to
growth, Our arms and fingers grow in certain directions, not haphazardly.
So controlled movements can be either slow or fast. If fast responses to
stimuli are to be made, information transfer must happen very quickly.
For this, the medium of transmission must be able to move rapidly.

Control and Coordination

Page_Number 121 ended
/n
Page_Number 122 started
Electrical impulses are an excellent means for this. But there are
limitations to the use of electrical impulses. Firstly, they will reach only
those cells that are connected by nervous tissue, not each and every cell
in the animal body. Secondly, once an electrical impulse is generated in
acell and transmitted, the cell will take some time to reset its mechanisms
before it can generate and transmit a new impulse. In other words, cells
cannot continually create and transmit electrical impulses. It is thus no
wonder that most multicellular organisms use another means of
communication between cells, namely, chemical communication.

If, instead of generating an electrical impulse, stimulated cells release
a chemical compound, this compound would diffuse all around the
original cell. If other cells around have the means to detect this compound
using special molecules on their surfaces, then they would be able to
recognise information, and even transmit it. This will be slower, of course,
but it can potentially reach all cells of the body, regardless of nervous
connections, and it can be done steadily and persistently. These
compounds, or hormones used by multicellular organisms for control
and coordination show a great deal of diversity, as we would expect.
Different plant hormones help to coordinate growth, development and
responses to the environment. They are synthesised at places away from
where they act and simply diffuse to the area of action.

Let us take an example that we have worked with earlier [Activity 7.2].
When growing plants detect light. a hormone called auxin, synthesised
at the shoot tip, helps the cells to grow longer. When light is coming from
one side of the plant, auxin diffuses towards the shady side of the shoot.
This concentration of auxin stimulates the cells to grow longer on the
side of the shoot which is away from light. Thus, the plant appears to
bend towards light.

Another example of plant hormones are gibberellins which, like
auxins, help in the growth of the stem. Cytokinins promote cell division.
and it is natural then that they are present in greater concentration in
areas of rapid cell division, such as in fruits and seeds. These are examples
of plant hormones that help in promoting growth. But plants also need
signals to stop growing. Abscisic acid is one example of a hormone which
inhibits growth. Its effects include wilting of leaves.

QU ES TION §S

What are plant hormones?

How is the movement of leaves of the sensitive plant different from the
tTovement of a shoot towards light?

Give an example of a plant hormone that promotes growth.

How do auxins promote the growth of a tendril around a support?

Design an experiment to demonstrate hydrotropism.

1 Science

Page_Number 122 ended
/n
Page_Number 123 started
7.3 HORMONES IN ANIMALS

How are such chemical, or hormonal, means of information transmission
used in animals? What do some animals, for instance squirrels,
experience when they are in a scary situation? Their bodies have to
prepare for either fighting or running away. Both are very complicated
activities that will use a great deal of energy in controlled ways. Many
different tissue types will be used and their activities integrated together
in these actions. However, the two alternate activities, fighting or running.
are also quite different! So here is a situation in which some common
preparations can be usefully made in the body. These preparations
should ideally make it easier to do either activity in the near future. How
would this be achieved?

If the body design in the squirrel relied only on electrical impulses
via nerve cells, the range of tissues instructed to prepare for the coming
activity would be limited. On the other hand, ifa chemical signal were to
be sent as well, it would reach all cells of the body and provide the wide-
ranging changes needed. This is done in many animals, including human
beings, using a hormone called adrenaline that is secreted from the
adrenal glands. Look at Fig. 7.7 to locate these glands.

Adrenaline is secreted directly into the blood and carried to different
parts of the body. The target organs or the specific tissues on which it
acts include the heart. As a result, the heart beats faster, resulting in
supply of more oxygen to our muscles. The blood to the digestive system
and skin is reduced due to contraction of muscles around small arteries
in these organs. This diverts the blood to our skeletal muscles. The
breathing rate also increases because of the contractions of the
diaphragm and the rib muscles, All these responses together enable the
animal body to be ready to deal with the situation. Such animal hormones
are part of the endocrine system which constitutes a second way of control
and coordination in our body.

Activity 7.3

Look at Fig. 7.7.

Identify the endocrine glands mentioned in the figure.

Some of these glands have been discussed in the text. Consult
books in the library and discuss with your teachers to find out
about the functions of other glands.

Remember that plants have hormones that control their directional
growth. What functions do animal hormones perform? On the face of it.
we cannot imagine their role in directional growth. We have never seen
an animal growing more in one direction or the other, depending on
light or gravity! But if we think about it a bit more, it will become evident
that, even in animal bodies, growth happens in carefully controlled places.
Plants will grow leaves in many places on the plant body, for example.
But we do not grow fingers on our faces. The design of the body is carefully
maintained even during the growth of children.

Control and Coordination

Page_Number 123 ended
/n
Page_Number 124 started
Hypothalamus

Parathyroid
glands

Thymus

Pancreas

14

Pineal gland
= Hypothalamus

Pituitary gland

Parathyroid
glands

Thymus

Ovary

(a) @)

Figure 7.7 Endocrine glands in human beings (a) mate, (b) female

Let us examine some examples to understand how hormones help
in coordinated growth. We have all seen salt packets which say ‘iodised
salt’ or ‘enriched with iodine’. Why is it important for us to have iodised
salt in our diet? Iodine is necessary for the thyroid gland to make
thyroxin hormone. Thyroxin regulates carbohydrate, protein and fat
metabolism in the body so as to provide the best balance for growth.
Iodine is essential for the synthesis of thyroxin. In case iodine is deficient
in our diet, there is a possibility that we might suffer from goitre. One of
the symptoms in this disease is a swollen neck, Can you correlate this
with the position of the thyroid gland in Fig. 7.7?

Sometimes we come across people who are either very short (dwarfs)
or extremely tall Giants). Have you ever wondered how this happens?
Growth hormone is one of the hormones secreted by the pituitary. As its
name indicates, growth hormone regulates growth and development of
the body. If there is a deficiency of this hormone in childhood, it leads to
dwarfism.

You must have noticed many dramatic changes in your appearance
as well as that of your friends as you approached 10-12 years of age.
These changes associated with puberty are because of the secretion of
testosterone in males and oestrogen in females.

Do you know anyone in your family or friends who has been advised
by the doctor to take less sugar in their diet because they are suffering
Jrom diabetes? As a treatment, they might be taking injections of insulin.
This is a hormone which is produced by the pancreas and helps in
regulating blood sugar levels. If it is not secreted in proper amounts, the
sugar level in the blood rises causing many harmful effects.

Science

Page_Number 124 ended
/n
Page_Number 125 started
If it is so important that hormones should be secreted in precise
quantities, we need a mechanism through which this is done. The timing
and amount of hormone released are regulated by feedback mechanisms.
For example, if the sugar levels in blood rise, they are detected by the
cells of the pancreas which respond by producing more insulin. As the
blood sugar level falls, insulin secretion is reduced.

How does chemical coordination take place in animals?
Why is the use of iodised salt advisable?
How does our body respond when adrenaline is secreted into the blood?

Why are some patients of diabetes treated by giving injections of insulin?

Control and coordination are the functions of the nervous system and hormones
in our bodies.

The responses of the nervous system can be classified as reflex action, voluntary
action or involuntary action.

The nervous system uses electrical impulses to transmit messages.

The nervous system gets information from our sense organs and acts through our
muscles.

Chemical coordination is seen in both plants and animals.

Hormones produced in one part of an organism move to another part to achieve
the desired effect.

A feedback mechanism regulates the action of the hormones.

Which of the following is a plant hormone?
(a) Insulin
(b) Thyroxin
( Oestrogen
(a) Cytokinin.
. The gap between two neurons is called a
(a) dendrite.
(b) — synapse.
(c) axon.
impulse.

Control and Coordination 1

Page_Number 125 ended
/n
Page_Number 126 started
. The brain is responsible for
(a) _ thinking.
(b) — regulating the heart beat.
(c) balancing the body.
(ad) allof the above.

. What is the function of receptors in our body? Think of situations where receptors
do not work properly. What problems are likely to arise?

. Draw the structure of a neuron and explain its function.

. How does phototropism occur in planis?

. Which signals will get disrupted in case of a spinal cord injury?
. How does chemical coordination occur in plants?

. What is the need for a system of control and coordination in an organism?
. How are involuntary actions and reflex actions different from each other?

. Compare and contrast nervous and hormonal mechanisms for control and
coordination in animals.

. What is the difference between the manner in which movement takes place ina
sensitive plant and the movement in our legs?

126 Science

Page_Number 126 ended
/n
Page_Number 127 started
CHAPTERO
How do Organisms
Reproduce?

Be we discuss the mechanisms by which organisms reproduce,
let us ask a more basic question — why do organisms reproduce?
After all, reproduction is not necessary to maintain the life of an individual
organism, unlike the essential life processes such as nutrition,
respiration, or excretion. On the other hand, if an individual organism is
going to create more individuals, a lot of its energy will be spent in the
process. So why should an individual organism waste energy on a process
it does not need to stay alive? It would be interesting to discuss the
possible answers in the classroom!

Whatever the answer to this question, it is obvious that we notice
organisms because they reproduce. If there were to be only one, non-
reproducing member of a particular kind, it is doubtful that we would
have noticed its existence. It is the large numbers of organisms belonging
to a single species that bring them to our notice. How do we know that
two different individual organisms belong to the same species? Usually.
we say this because they look similar to each other. Thus, reproducing
organisms create new individuals that look very much like themselves.

8.1 DO ORGANISMS CREATE EXACT COPIES OF
THEMSELVES?

Organisms look similar because their body designs are similar If body
designs are to be similar, the blueprints for these designs should be
similar. Thus, reproduction at its most basic level will involve making
copies of the blueprints of body design. In Class LX, we learnt that the
chromosomes in the nucleus of a cell contain information for inheritance
of features from parents to next generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribo
Nucleic Acid) molecules. The DNA in the cell nucleus is the information
source for making proteins. If the information is changed, different
proteins will be made. Different proteins will eventually lead to altered
body designs.

Therefore, a basic event in reproduction is the creation of a DNA
copy. Cells use chemical reactions to build copies of their DNA. This
creates two copies of the DNA in a reproducing cell, and they will need to
be separated _ from each other. However, keeping one copy of DNA in the
original cell and simply pushing the other one out would not work,

Page_Number 127 ended
/n
Page_Number 128 started
because the copy pushed out would not have any organised cellular
structure for maintaining life processes. Therefore, DNA copying is
accompanied by the creation of an additional cellular apparatus, and
then the DNA copies separate, each with its own cellular apparatus.
Effectively, a cell divides to give rise to two cells.

These two cells are of course similar but are they likely to be
absolutely identical? The answer to this question will depend on how
accurately the copying reactions involved occur. No bio-chemical reaction
is absolutely reliable. Therefore, it is only to be expected that the process
of copying the DNA will have some variations each time. As a result, the
DNA copies generated will be similar, but may not be identical to the
original. Some of these variations might be so drastic that the new DNA
copy cannot work with the cellular apparatus it inherits. Such anewborn
cell will simply die. On the other hand, there could still be many other
variations in the DNA copies that would not lead to such a drastic
outcome. Thus, the surviving cells are similar to, but subtly different
Jjrom each other. This inbuilt tendency for variation during reproduction
is the basis for evolution, as we will discuss in the next chapter.

8.1.1 The Importance of Variation

Populations of organisms fill well-defined places, or niches, in the
ecosystem, using their ability to reproduce. The consistency of DNA
copying during reproduction is important for the maintenance of body
design features that allow the organism to use that particular niche.
Reproduction is therefore linked to the stability of populations of species.

However, niches can change because of reasons beyond the control
of the organisms. Temperatures on earth can go up or down, water levels
can vary, or there could be meteorite hits, to think of a few examples. If
a population of reproducing organisms were suited to a particular niche
and if the niche were drastically altered, the population could be wiped
out. However, if some variations were to be present in a few individuals
in these populations, there would be some chance for them to survive.
Thus, if there were a population of bacteria living in temperate waters,
and if the water temperature were to be increased by global warming,
most of these bacteria would die, but the few variants resistant to heat
would survive and grow further. Variation is thus useful for the survival
of species over time.

QUESTIONS

What is the importance of DNA copying in reproduction?

Why is variation beneficial to the species but not necessarily
Jor the individual?

1 Science

Page_Number 128 ended
/n
Page_Number 129 started
8.2 MODES OF REPRODUCTION USED BY SINGLE
ORGANISMS

Activity 8.1

Dissolve about 10 gm of sugar in 100 mL of water.

Take 20 mL of this solution in a test tube and add a pinch of yeast
granules to it.

Put a cotton plug on the mouth of the test tube and keep it ina
warm place,

After 1 or 2 hours, put a small drop of yeast culture from the test
tube on a slide and cover it with a coverslip.

Observe the slide under a microscope.

Activity 8.2

Wet a slice of bread, and keep it in a cool, moist and dark place.
Observe the surface of the slice with a magnifying glass.
Record your observations for a week.

Compare and contrast the ways in which yeast grows in the first
case, and how mould grows in the second.

Having discussed the context in which reproductive processes work,
let us now examine how different organisms actually reproduce. The
modes by which various organisms reproduce depend on the body
design of the organisms.

8.2.1 Fission

For unicellular organisms, cell division, or fission, leads to the creation
of new individuals. Many different patterns of fission have been observed.
Many bacteria and protozoa simply split into two equal halves during
cell division. In organisms such as Amoeba, the splitting of the two cells
during division can take place in any plane.

Activity 8.3

Observe a permanent slide of
Amoeba under a microscope.
Similarly observe another
permanent slide of Amoeba
showing binary fission.

Now, compare the observations of
both the slides. Figure 8.1 Binary fission in Amoeba

However, some unicellular organisms show somewhat more
organisation of their bodies, such as is seen in Leishmania (which cause
kala-azai, which have a whip-like structure at one end of the cell. In
such organisms, binary fission occurs in a definite orientation in relation

How do Organisms Reproduce?

Page_Number 129 ended
/n
Page_Number 130 started
Figure 8.2
Multiple fission
Plasmodium

in

to these structures. Other single-celled organisms, such as the malarial
parasite, Plasmodium, divide into many daughter cells simultaneously
by multiple fission.

Yeast, on the other hand, can put out small buds that separate and
grow further, as we saw in Activity 8.1.

8.2.2 Fragmentation

Activity 8.4

Collect water from a lake or pond that appears dark green and
contains filamentous structures.

Put one or two filaments on a slide.

Put a drop of glycerine on these filaments and cover it with a coverslip.
Observe the slide under a microscope.

Can you identify different tissues in the Spirogyra filaments?

In multi-cellular organisms with relatively simple body organisation,
simple reproductive methods can still work. Spirogyra, for example,
simply breaks up into smaller pieces upon maturation. These pieces or
Jragments grow into new individuals. Can we work out the reason for
this, based on what we saw in Activity 8.4?

This is not true for all multi-cellular organisms. They cannot simply
divide cell-by-cell. The reason is that many multi-cellular organisms, as
we have seen, are not simply a random collection of cells. Specialised
cells are organised as tissues, and tissues are organised into organs,
which then have to be placed at definite positions in the body. In sucha
carefully organised situation, cell-by-cell division would be impractical.
Multi-cellular organisms, therefore, need to use more complex ways of
reproduction.

A basic strategy used in multi-cellular organisms is that different
cell types perform different specialised functions. Following this general
pattern, reproduction in such organisms is also the function of a specific
cell type. How is reproduction to be achieved from a single cell type. if
the organism itself consists of many cell types? The answer is that there
must be a single cell type in the organism that is capable of growing,
proliferating and making other cell types under the right circumstances.

8.2.3 Regeneration

Many fully differentiated organisms have the ability to give rise to new
individual organisms from their body parts. That is, if the individual is
somehow cut or broken up into many pieces, many of these pieces grow
into separate individuals. For example, simple animals like Hydra and
Planaria can be cut into any number of pieces and each piece grows
into a complete organism. This is known as regeneration (see Fig. 8.3).
Regeneration is carried out by specialised cells. These cells proliferate
and make large numbers of cells. From this mass of cells, different cells
undergo changes to become various cell types and tissues. These changes

Science

Page_Number 130 ended
/n
Page_Number 131 started
take place in an organised
sequence referred to as
development. However.
regeneration is not the same

A i ‘ as reproduction, since most

ce) organisms would not
y 8.2.4 Budding

normally depend on being cut
- Organisms such as Hydra
= use regenerative cells for

up to be able to reproduce.
reproduction in the process of
budding. In Hydra, a bud
Figure 8.3 Regeneration in Planaria develops as an outgrowth due
to repeated cell division at one
specific site (Fig. 8.4). These buds develop into tiny individuals and when
Jully mature, detach from the parent body and become new independent
individuals.

Tentacles

mn ie

Figure 8.4 Budding in Hydra

8.2.5 Vegetative Propagation

There are many plants in which parts like the root, stem and leaves
develop into new plants under appropriate conditions. Unlike in most
animals, plants can indeed use such a mode for reproduction. This
property of vegetative propagation is used in methods such as layering
or grafting to grow many plants like sugarcane, roses, or grapes for
agricultural purposes. Plants raised by vegetative propagation can bear
Jlowers and fruits earlier than those produced from seeds. Such methods
also make possible the propagation of plants such as banana, orange,
rose and jasmine that have lost the capacity to produce seeds. Another
advantage of vegetative propagation is that all plants produced are
genetically similar enough to the parent plant to have all its
characteristics.

How do Organisms Reproduce?

Page_Number 131 ended
/n
Page_Number 132 started
Activity 8.5

Take a potato and observe its surface. Can notches be seen?
Cut the potato into small pieces such that some pieces contain a
notch or bud and some do not.

Spread some cotton on a tray and wet it. Place the potato pieces
on this cotton. Note where the pieces with the buds are placed.
Observe changes taking place in these potato pieces over the next
few days. Make sure that the cotton is kept moistened.

Which are the potato pieces that give rise to fresh green shoots
and roots?

Buds Similarly buds produced in the notches along the leaf

margin of Bryophyllum fall on the soil and develop into
new plants (Fig. 8.5).

Activity 8.6

Select a money-plant.
Cut some pieces such that they contain at least

Figure 8.5 one leaf.
Leaf of Bryophylium Cut out some other portions between two leaves.
with buds Dip one end of all the pieces in water and observe

over the next few days.
Which ones grow and give rise to fresh leaves?
What can you conclude from your observations?

Tissue culture

In tissue culture, new plants are grown by removing tissue or separating cells from
the growing tip of a plant. The cells are then placed in an artificial medium where they
divide rapidly to form a small group of cells or callus. The callus is transferred to
another medium containing hormones for growth and differentiation. The plantlets
are then placed in the soil so that they can grow into mature plants. Using tissue
culture, many plants can be grown from one parent in disease-free conditions. This
technique is commonly used for ornamental plants.

8.2.6 Spore Formation

Even in many simple multi-cellular organisms, specific reproductive
parts can be identified. The thread-like structures that developed on
the bread in Activity 8.2 above are the hyphae of the bread mould
(Rhizopus). They are not reproductive parts. On the other hand, the
tiny blob-on-a-stick structures are involved in reproduction. The
blobs are sporangia, which contain cells, or spores, that can
eventually develop into new Rhizopus individuals (Fig. 8.6). The spores
are covered by thick walls that protect them until they come into
‘Spore formation tr.Rhizopus contact with another moist surface and can begin to grow.

1 Science

Page_Number 132 ended
/n
Page_Number 133 started
All the modes of reproduction that we have discussed so far allow
new generations to be created from a single individual. This is known as
asexual reproduction.

OUES TIONS

How does binary fission differ from multiple fission?

How will an organism be benefited if it reproduces through spores?
Can you think of reasons why more complex organisms cannot give
rise to new individuals through regeneration?

Why is vegetative propagation practised for growing some types of
plants?

Why is DNA copying an essential part of the process of reproduction?

8.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION

We are also familiar with modes of reproduction that depend on the
involvement of two individuals before a new generation can be created.
Bulls alone cannot produce new calves, nor can hens alone produce
new chicks. In such cases, both sexes, males and females, are needed to
produce new generations. What is the significance of this sexual mode
of reproduction? Are there any limitations of the asexual mode of
reproduction, which we have been discussing above?

8.3.1 Why the Sexual Mode of Reproduction?

The creation of two new cells from one involves copying of the DNA as
well as of the cellular apparatus. The DNA copying mechanism, as we
have noted, cannot be absolutely accurate, and the resultant errors are
a source of variations in populations of organisms. Every individual
organism cannot be protected by variations, but in a population,
variations are useful for ensuring the survival of the species. It would
therefore make sense if organisms came up with reproductive modes
that allowed more and more variation to be generated.

While DNA-copying mechanisms are not absolutely accurate, they
are precise enough to make the generation of variation a fairly slow
process. If the DNA copying mechanisms were to be less accurate, many
of the resultant DNA copies would not be able to work with the cellular
apparatus, and would die. So how can the process of making variants
be speeded up? Each new variation is made in a DNA copy that already
has variations accumulated from previous generations. Thus, two
different individuals in a population would have quite different patterns
of accumulated variations. Since all of these variations are in living
individuals, it is assured that they do not have any really bad effects.
Combining variations from two or more individuals would thus create
new combinations of variants. Each combination would be novel, since
it would involve two different individuals. The sexual mode of

How do Organisms Reproduce? 1

Page_Number 133 ended
/n
Page_Number 134 started
Style
Pistil

Ovary
Figure 8.7

Longitudinal section of
Slower

reproduction incorporates such a process of combining DNA from two
different individuals during reproduction.

But this creates a major difficulty. If each new generation is to be the
combination of the DNA copies from two pre-existing individuals, then
each new generation will end up having twice the amount of DNA that
the previous generation had. This is likely to mess up the control of the
cellular apparatus by the DNA. Besides, if each generation doubles its
DNA, fairly soon there will be only DNA on earth, with no room for
anything else. How many ways can we think of for solving this difficulty?

We have seen earlier that as organisms become more complex, the
specialisation of tissue increases. One solution that many multi-cellular
organisms have found for the problem mentioned above is to have special
lineages of cells in specialised organs which have only half the number
of chromosomes and half the amount of DNA as compared to the non-
reproductive body cells. Thus, when these germ-cells from two
individuals combine during sexual reproduction to form a new
individual, it results in re-establishment of the number of chromosomes
and the DNA content in the new generation.

If the zygote is to grow and develop into an organism which has
highly specialised tissues and organs, then it has to have sufficient stores
of energy for doing this. In very simple organisms, it is seen that the two
germ-cells are not very different from one another, or may even be similar.
But as the body designs become more complex, the germ-cells also
specialise. One germ-cell is large and contains the food-stores while the
other is smaller and likely to be motile. Conventionally, the motile germ-
cell is called the male gamete and the germ-cell containing the stored
food is called the female gamete. We shall see in the next few sections
how the need to create these two different types of gametes give rise to
differences in the male and female reproductive organs and, in some
cases, differences in the bodies of the male and female organisms.

8.3.2 Sexual Reproduction in Flowering Plants

The reproductive parts of angiosperms are located in the flower You
have already studied the different parts of a flower — sepals, petals,
stamens and carpels. Stamens and carpels
are the reproductive parts of a flower which
Anther)§ Contain the germ-cells. What possible

& functions could the petals and sepals serve?
Filament) The flower may be unisexual (papaya.
watermelon) when it contains either stamens
or carpels or bisexual (Hibiscus, mustard)
when it contains both stamens and carpels.
Stamen is the male reproductive part and it
produces pollen grains that are yellowish
in colour, You must have seen this yellowish
powder that often sticks to our hands if we
touch the stamen of a flower. Carpel is
present in the centre of a flower and is the
Jemale reproductive part. It is made of three

Science

Page_Number 134 ended
/n
Page_Number 135 started
parts. The swollen bottom part is the ovary, middle elongated part is the
style and the terminal part which may be sticky is the stigma. The ovary
contains ovules and each ovule has an egg cell. The male germ-cell
produced by pollen grain fuses with the female gamete present in
the ovule. This fusion of the germ-cells or fertilisation gives us the
zygote which is capable of growing into a new plant.

Thus the pollen needs to be transferred from the stamen to the
stigma. If this transfer of pollen occurs in the same flower, it is
referred to as self-pollination. On the other hand, if the pollen is
transferred from one flower to another, it is known as cross-
pollination. This transfer of pollen from one flower to another is
achieved by agents like wind, water or animals.

After the pollen lands on a suitable stigma, it has to reach the,
female germ-cells which are in the ovary. For this, a tube grows = /
out of the pollen grain and travels through the style to reach the
ovary.

After fertilisation, the zygote divides several times to form an
embryo within the ovule. The ovule develops a tough coat and is
gradually converted into a seed. The ovary grows rapidly and ripens
to form a fruit. Meanwhile, the petals, sepals, stamens, style and
stigma may shrivel and fall off. Have you ever observed any flower

Pollen grain
"+ Stigma

Male germ-cell

Pollen tube

— Ovary

Female
germ-cell

part still persisting in the fruit? Try and work out the advantages Figure 8.8
of seed-formation for the plant. The seed contains the future plant Soman 2 of pollen on

or embryo which develops into a seedling under appropriate
conditions. This process is known as germination.

Activity 8.7 Ne 7
“ Pramate 4
- yA Tass shoot) “4

Soak a few seeds of Bengal gram (chana) and Cotyledon 4 S2 | ; j
keep them overnight. (food store) “LL” Se
Drain the excess water and cover the seeds

with a wet cloth and leave them for a day. Figure 8.9

Make sure that the seeds do not become dry. Germination

Cut open the seeds carefully and observe
the different parts.

Compare your observations with the Fig. 8.9
and see if you can identify all the parts.

8.3.3 Reproduction in Human Beings

So far, we have been discussing the variety of modes that different species
use for reproduction. Let us now look at the species that we are most
interested in, namely, humans. Humans use a sexual mode of
reproduction. How does this process work?

Let us begin at an apparently unrelated point. All of us know that
our bodies change as we become older. Our height increases from
Class II to Class X, and so does our weight (sometimes too much!). We
acquire teeth, we even lose the old, so-called milk teeth and acquire new

How do Organisms Reproduce? 1

Page_Number 135 ended
/n
Page_Number 136 started
ones, All of these are changes that can be grouped under the general
process of growth, in which the body becomes larger. But in early teenage
years, a whole new set of changes occurs that cannot be explained simply
as body enlargement. Instead, the appearance of the body changes.
Proportions change, new features appear, and so do new sensations.

Some of these changes are common to both boys and girls. We begin
to notice thick hair growing in new parts of the body such as armpits
and the genital area between the thighs, which can also become darker
in colour. Thinner hair can also appear on legs and arms, as well as on
the face. The skin frequently becomes oily and we might begin to develop
pimples. We begin to be conscious and aware of both our own bodies
and those of others in new ways.

On the other hand. there are also changes taking place that are
different between boys and girls. In girls, breast size begins to increase,
with darkening of the skin of the nipples at the tips of the breasts. Also,
girls begin to menstruate at around this time. Boys begin to have new
thick hair growth on the face and their voices begin to crack. Further,
the penis occasionally begins to become enlarged and erect, either in
daydreams or at night.

All of these changes take place slowly, over a period of months and
years. They do not happen all at the same time in one person, nor do
they happen at an exact age. In some people, they happen early and
quickly, while in others, they can happen very slowly. Also, each change
does not become complete quickly either. So, for example, thick hair on
the face in boys appears as a few scattered hairs first, and only slowly
does the growth begin to become uniform. Even so, all these changes
show differences between people. Just as we have differenily shaped
noses or fingers, so also we have different patterns of hair growth, or size
and shape of breast or penis. All of these changes are aspects of the
sexual maturation of the body.

Why does the body show sexual maturation at this age? We have
talked about the need for specialised cell types in multi-cellular bodies
to carry out specialised functions. The creation of germ-cells to participate
in sexual reproduction is another specialised function, and we have seen
that plants develop special cell and tissue types to create them. Human
beings also develop special tissues for this purpose. However, while the
body of the individual organism is growing to its adult size, the resources
of the body are mainly directed at achieving this growth. While that is
happening, the maturation of the reproductive tissue is not likely to be
amajor priority. Thus, as the rate of general body growth begins to slow
down, reproductive tissues begin to mature. This period during
adolescence is called puberty.

So how do all the changes that we have talked about link to the
reproductive process? We must remember that the sexual mode of
reproduction means that germ-cells from two individuals have to join
together. This can happen by the external release of germ-cells from the
bodies of individuals, as happens in flowering plants. Or it can happen
by two individuals joining their bodies together for internal transfer of
germ-cells for fusion, as happens in many animals. If animals are to

Science

Page_Number 136 ended
/n
Page_Number 137 started
participate in this process of mating, their state of sexual maturity must
be identifiable by other individuals. Many changes during puberty, such
as new hair-growth patterns, are signals that sexual maturation is taking

place.

On the other hand, the actual transfer of germ-cells between two
people needs special organs for the sexual act, such as the penis when it
is capable of becoming erect. In mammals such as humans, the baby is
carried in the mother’s body for a long period, and will be breast-fed
later. The female reproductive organs and breasts will need to mature to
accommodate these possibilities. Let us look at the systems involved in

the process of sexual reproduction.

8.3.3 (a) Male Reproductive System

The male reproductive system (Fig. 8.10)
consists of portions which produce the
germ-cells and other portions that deliver
the germ-cells to the site of fertilisation.

The formation of germ-cells or sperms
takes place in the testes. These are located
outside the abdominal cavity in scrotum
because sperm formation requires a lower
temperature than the normal body
temperature. We have discussed the role of
the testes in the secretion of the hormone,
testosterone, in the previous chapter. In
addition to regulating the formation of
sperms, testosterone brings about changes
in appearance seen in boys at the time of
puberty.

The sperms formed are delivered
through the vas deferens which unites with
a tube coming from the urinary bladder. The
urethra thus forms a common passage for
both the sperms and urine. Along the path
of the vas deferens, glands like the prostate
and the seminal vesicles add their secretions
so that the sperms are now ina fluid which
makes their transport easier and this fluid
also provides nutrition. The sperms are tiny
bodies that consist of mainly genetic
material and a long tail that helps them to
move towards the female germ-cell.

8.3.3 (6) Female Reproductive
System

The female germ-cells or eggs are made in
the ovaries. They are also responsible for the
production of some hormones. Look at

How do Organisms Reproduce?

Ureter

Seminal vesicle

Vas
deferens

Scrotum

Figure 8.10 Human-—male reproductive system

Oviduct or
Fallopian
tube

Ovary

Figure 8.11 Human-—/emale reproductive system

Page_Number 137 ended
/n
Page_Number 138 started
Fig. 8.11 and identify the various organs in the female reproductive
system.

When a girl is born, the ovaries already contain thousands of
immature eggs. On reaching puberty, some of these start maturing. One
egg is produced every month by one of the ovaries. The egg is carried
Jjrom the ovary to the womb through a thin oviduct or fallopian tube.
The two oviducts unite into an elastic bag-like structure known as the
uterus. The uterus opens into the vagina through the cervix.

The sperms enter through the vaginal passage during sexual
intercourse. They travel upwards and reach the oviduct where they may
encounter the egg. The fertilised egg, the zygote, gets implanted in the
lining of the uterus, and starts dividing. We have seen in earlier sections
that the mother’s body is designed to undertake the development of the
child. Hence the uterus prepares itself every month to receive and nurture
the growing embryo. The lining thickens and is richly supplied with
blood to nourish the growing embryo.

The embryo gets nutrition from the mother’s blood with the help of a
special tissue called placenta. This is a disc which is embedded in the
uterine wall. It contains villi on the embryo’s side of the tissue. On the
mother’s side are blood spaces, which surround the villi. This provides
a large surface area for glucose and oxygen to pass from the mother to
the embryo. The developing embryo will also generate waste substances
which can be removed by transferring them into the mother’s blood
through the placenta. The development of the child inside the mother’s
body takes approximately nine months. The child is born as a result of
rhythmic contractions of the muscles in the uterus.

8.3.3 (c) What happens when the Egg is not Fertilised?

If the egg is not fertilised, it lives for about one day. Since the ovary
releases one egg every month, the uterus also prepares itself every month
to receive a fertilised egg. Thus its lining becomes thick and spongy.
This would be required for nourishing the embryo if fertilisation had
taken place. Now, however, this lining is not needed any longer. So, the
lining slowly breaks and comes out through the vagina as blood and
mucous. This cycle takes place roughly every month and is known as
menstruation. It usually lasts for about two to eight days.

8.3.3 (d) Reproductive Health

As we have seen, the process of sexual maturation is gradual, and takes
place while general body growth is still going on. Therefore, some degree
of sexual maturation does not necessarily mean that the body or the
mind is ready for sexual acts or for having and bringing up children.
How do we decide if the body or the mind is ready for this major
responsibility? All of us are under many different kinds of pressures
about these issues. There can be pressure from our friends for
participating in many activities, whether we really want to or not. There
can be pressure from families to get married and start having children.

Science

Page_Number 138 ended
/n
Page_Number 139 started
There can be pressure from government agencies to avoid having
children. In this situation, making choices can become very difficult.

We must also consider the possible health consequences of having
sex. We have discussed in Class IX that diseases can be transmitted
Jrom person to person in a variety of ways. Since the sexual act is a
very intimate connection of bodies, it is not surprising that many
diseases can be sexually transmitted. These include bacterial infections
such as gonorrhoea and syphilis, and viral infections such as warts
and HIV-AIDS. Is it possible to prevent the transmission of such diseases
during the sexual act? Using a covering, called a condom, for the penis
during sex helps to prevent transmission of many of these infections to
some extent.

The sexual act always has the potential to lead to pregnancy.
Pregnancy will make major demands on the body and the mind of the
woman, and if she is not ready for it, her health will be adversely
affected. Therefore, many ways have been devised to avoid pregnancy.
These contraceptive methods fall in a number of categories. One
category is the creation of a mechanical barrier so that sperm does not
reach the egg. Condoms on the penis or similar coverings worn in the
vagina can serve this purpose. Another category of contraceptives acts
by changing the hormonal balance of the body so that eggs are not
released and fertilisation cannot occur. These drugs commonly need
to be taken orally as pills. However, since they change hormonal
balances, they can cause side-effects too. Other contraceptive devices
such as the loop or the copper-T are placed in the uterus to prevent
pregnancy. Again, they can cause side effects due to irritation of the
uterus. If the vas deferens in the male is blocked, sperm transfer will
be prevented. If the fallopian tube in the female is blocked, the egg will
not be able to reach the uterus. In both cases fertilisation will not take
place. Surgical methods can be used to create such blocks. While
surgical methods are safe in the long run, surgery itself can cause
infections and other problems if not performed properly. Surgery can
also be used for removal of unwanted pregnancies. These may be
misused by people who do not want a particular child, as happens in
illegal sex-selective abortion of female foetuses. For a healthy society,
the female-male sex ratio must be maintained. Because of reckless
Jemale foeticides, child sex ratio is declining at an alarming rate in
some sections of our society, although prenatal sex determination has
been prohibited by law.

We have noted earlier that reproduction is the process by which
organisms increase their populations. The rates of birth and death ina
given population will determine its size. The size of the human population
is a cause for concern for many people. This is because an expanding
population makes it harder to improve everybody’s standard of living.
However, ifinequality in society is the main reason for poor standards of
living for many people, the size of the population is relatively unimportant.

How do Organisms Reproduce?

Page_Number 139 ended
/n
Page_Number 140 started
Q U ES TION S$

If we look around us, what can we identify as the most important reason(s) for poor, livi
tandards?

How is the process of pollination different from fertilisation?

What is the role of the seminal vesicles and the prostate gland?

What are the changes seen in girls at the time of puberty?

How does the embryo get nourishment inside the mother’s body?

If a woman is using a copper-T, will it help in protecting her from

sexually transmitted diseases?

Reproduction, unlike other life processes, is not essential to maintain the life of an
individual organism.

Reproduction involves creation of a DNA copy and additional cellular apparatus
by the cell involved in the process.

Various organisms use different modes of reproduction depending on their body
design.

In fission, many bacteria and protozoa simply divide into two or more daughter
cells.

Organisms such as hydra can regenerate if they are broken into pieces. They can
also give out buds which mature into new individuals.

Roots, stems and leaves of some plants develop into new plants through vegetative
propagation.

These are examples of asexual reproduction where new generations are created
Jrom a single individual.

Sexual reproduction involves two individuals for the creation of a new individual.

DNA copying mechanisms creates variations which are useful for ensuring the
survival of the species. Modes of sexual reproduction allow for greater variation to
be generated.

Reproduction in flowering plants involves transfer of pollen grains from the anther
to the stigma which is referred to as pollination. This is followed by fertilisation.
Changes in the body at puberty, such as increase in breast size in girls and new
Jacial hair growth in boys, are signs of sexual maturation.

The male reproductive system in human beings consists of testes which produce
sperms, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, prostate gland, urethra and penis.

The female reproductive system in human beings consists of ovaries, fallopian
tubes, uterus and vagina.

Sexual reproduction in human beings involves the introduction of sperm in the

14 Science

Page_Number 140 ended
/n
Page_Number 141 started
vagina of the female. Fertilisation occurs in the fallopian tube.

Contraception to avoid pregnancy can be achieved by the use of condoms, oral
pills, copper-T and other methods.

Asexual reproduction takes place through budding in
(a) amoeba.

(b) yeast.

(oc) plasmodium.

(2) leishmania.

Which of the following is not a part of the female reproductive system in human
beings?

(a) Ovary

(b) Uterus

(c) Vas deferens

(2) Fallopian tube

The anther contains

(a) sepals.

(b) ovules.

(c) carpel.

(a) pollen grains.

What are the advantages of sexual reproduction over asexual reproduction?
What are the functions performed by the testis in human beings?

Why does menstruation occur?
Draw a labelled diagram of the longitudinal section of a flower.
What are the different methods of contraception?

How are the modes for reproduction different in unicellular and
multicellular_ organisms?

10. How does reproduction help in providing stability to populations of species?
11. What could be the reasons for adopting contraceptive methods?

How do Organisms Reproduce? 141

Page_Number 141 ended
/n
Page_Number 142 started
CHAPTER 9
e« 3) Heredity and
Evolution

e have seen that reproductive processes give rise to new individuals

that are similar, but subtly different. We have discussed how some
amount of variation is produced even during asexual reproduction. And
the number of successful variations are maximised by the process of
sexual reproduction. If we observe a field of sugarcane we find very little
variations among the individual plants. But in a number of animals
including human beings, which reproduce sexually, quite distinct
variations are visible among different individuals. In this chapter, we
shall be studying the mechanism by which variations are created and
inherited. The long-term consequences of the accumulation of variations
are also an interesting point to be considered. We shall be studying this

under evolution.

9.1 ACCUMULATION OF VARIATION
DURING REPRODUCTION

omme

Figure 9.1

Creation of diversity over succeeding
generations. The original organism at the top
will give rise to, say, two individuals, similar
in body design, but with subtle differences.
Each of them, in turn, will give rise to two
individuals in the next generation. Each of
the four individuals in the bottom row will be
different from each other. While some of these
differences will be unique, others will be

inherited from their respective parents, who
were different from each other.

Inheritance from the previous generation provides both
a common basic body design, and subtle changes in it,
for the next generation. Now think about what would
happen when this new generation, in its turn,
reproduces. The second generation will have differences
that they inherit from the first generation, as well as
newly created differences (Fig. 9.1).

Figure 9.1 would represent the situation if a single
individual reproduces, as happens in asexual
reproduction. If one bacterium divides, and then the
resultant two bacteria divide again, the four individual
bacteria generated would be very similar. There would
be only very minor differences between them, generated
due to small inaccuracies in DNA copying. However, if
sexual reproduction is involved, even greater diversity
will be generated, as we will see when we discuss the
rules of inheritance.

Do all these variations in a species have equal
chances of surviving in the environment in which they
find themselves? Obviously not. Depending on the
nature of variations, different individuals would have

Page_Number 142 ended
/n
Page_Number 143 started
different kinds of advantages. Bacteria that can withstand heat will survive
better in a heat wave, as we have discussed earlier. Selection of variants
by environmental factors forms the basis for evolutionary processes, as
we will discuss in later sections.

Q U ES TION S

If a trait A exists in 10% of a population of an asexually reproducing

species and a trait B exists in 60% of the same population, which trait

is likely to have arisen earlier?

How does the creation of variations in a species promote survival?

9.2 HEREDITY

The most obvious outcome of the reproductive process still remains the
generation of individuals of similar design. The rules of heredity determine
the process by which traits and characteristics are reliably inherited. Let
us take a closer look at these rules.

9.2.1 Inherited Traits

What exactly do we mean by similarities and differences? We know that
a child bears all the basic features of a human being. However, it does
not look exactly like its parents, and human populations show a great
deal of variation.

Activity 9.1

Observe the ears of all the students in the class. Prepare a list of
students having free or attached earlobes and calculate the
percentage of students having each (Fig. 9.2). Find out about the
earlobes of the parents of each student in the class. Correlate the
earlobe type of each student with that of their parents. Based on
this evidence, suggest a possible rule for the inheritance of earlobe

types.

9.2.2 Rules for the Inheritance of Traits —
Mendel’s Contributions

The rules for inheritance of such traits in human beings are related to
the fact that both the father and the mother contribute practically equal
amounts of genetic material to the child. This means that each trait can
be influenced by both paternal and maternal DNA. Thus, for each trait
there will be two versions in each child. What will, then, the trait seen in
the child be? Mendel (see box) worked out the main rules of such
inheritance, and it is interesting to look at some of his experiments from
more than a century ago.

Heredity and Evolution

)

Figure 9.2

(a) Free and (b) attached
earlobes. The lowest part
of the ear, called the
earlobe, is closely attached
to the side of the head in
some of us, and not
in others. Free and
attached earlobes are two
variants found in human
populations.

143

Page_Number 143 ended
/n
Page_Number 144 started
Gregor Johann Mendel (1822-1884)

Mendel was educated in a monastery and went on to study science and
mathematics at the University of Vienna. Failure in the examinations for a
teaching certificate did not suppress his zeal for scientific quest. He went
back to his monastery and started growing peas. Many others had studied

the inheritance of traits in peas and other organisms earlier, but Mendel
blended his knowledge of science and mathematics and was the first one
to keep count of individuals exhibiting a particular trait in each generation.
This helped him to arrive at the laws of inheritance that we have discussed
in the main text.

Mendel used a number of contrasting visible characters of garden
peas — round/wrinkled seeds, tall/short plants, white/violet flowers and
so on. He took pea plants with different characteristics — a tall plant and
a short plant, produced progeny from them, and calculated the
percentages of tall or short progeny.

In the first place, there were no halfway characteristics in this first-
generation, or F1 progeny — no ‘medium-height’ plants. All plants were

Fl tall. This meant that only one of the parental traits

was seen, not some mixture of the two. So the next
question was, were the tall plants in the Fl
generation exactly the same as the tall plants of the
parent generation? Mendelian experiments test this
by getting both the parental plants and these F1 tall

—>
plants to reproduce by self-pollination. The progeny
; of the parental plants are, of course, all tall. However,
fas x oO All Tareas the second-generation, or F2, progeny of the F1 tall

plants are not all tall. Instead, one quarter of them
Fix Fl F2 are short. This indicates that both the tallness and
shortness traits were inherited in the F1 plants, but
only the tallness trait was expressed. Thus, two
copies of the trait are inherited in each sexually

—_—
reproducing organism. These two may be identical,
or may be different, depending on the parentage. A
pattern of inheritance can be worked out with this
Tall x Tall Tall Tall Tall Short : . .
(ry) (rt) an (ty qm) (ti) assumption, as shown in Fig. 9.3.
Figure 9.3
Inheritance of traits Activity 9.2
over two generations

In Fig. 9.3, what experiment would we do to confirm that the F2
generation did in fact have a 1:2:1 ratio of TT, Tt and tt trait
combinations?

In this explanation, both TT and Tt are tall plants, while only ttisa
short plant. In other words, a single copy of ‘T’ is enough to make the
plant tall, while both copies have to be ‘t’ for the plant to be short. Traits
like ‘T’ are called dominant traits, while those that behave like ‘t’ are
called recessive traits. Work out which trait would be considered
dominant and which one recessive in Fig. 9.4.

144 Science

Page_Number 144 ended
/n
Page_Number 145 started
What happens when pea plants showing two different
characteristics, rather than just one, are bred with each other?
What do the progeny of a tall plant with round seeds and a short
plant with wrinkled-seeds look like? They are all tall and have
round seeds. Tallness and round seeds are thus dominant traits.
But what happens when these F1 progeny are used to generate
F2 progeny by self- pollination? A Mendelian experiment will find
that some F2 progeny are tall plants with round seeds, and some
were short plants with wrinkled seeds. However, there would
also be some F2 progeny that showed new mixtures. Some of
them would be tall, but have wrinkled seeds, while others would
be short, but have round seeds. Thus, the tall/short trait and
the round seed/wrinkled seed trait are independently inherited.
Another example is shown in Fig. 9.5.

9.2.3 How do these Traits get Expressed?

How does the mechanism of heredity work? Cellular DNA is
the information source for making proteins in the cell. A

section of DNA that provides information for one protein is P

called the gene for that protein. How do proteins control the
characteristics that we are discussing here? Let us take the

cross fertilisation

2s

self fertilisation

AAA

3: 1 Ratio

"<a &

Figure 9.4

O* od
RRyy rr YY
(round, green) _ (wrinkled, yellow)

{ {

example of tallness as a characteristic. We know that plants Gametes Ry, rY

have hormones that can trigger growth. Plant height can
thus depend on the amount of a particular plant hormone.
The amount of the plant hormone made will depend on the
efficiency of the process for making it. Consider now an
enzyme that is important for this process. If this enzyme
works efficiently, a lot of hormone will be made, and the
plant will be tall. Ifthe gene for that enzyme has an alteration

that makes the enzyme less efficient, the amount of hormone
F2 315 round, yellow

will be less, and the plant will be short. Thus, genes control
characteristics, or traits.

If the interpretations of Mendelian experiments we have
been discussing are correct, then both parents must be
contributing equally to the DNA of the progeny during sexual
reproduction. We have disscussed this issue in the previous
Chapter. If both parents can help determine the trait in the
progeny, both parents must be contributing a copy of the same
gene. This means that each pea plant must have two sets of all
genes, one inherited from each parent. For this mechanism to
work, each germ cell must have only one gene set.

How do germ-cells make a single set of genes from the

FL

NA 4

Ox

Rr Yy
(round, yellow)

e:9?

t

Ratio

108 round, green 3

101 wrinkled, yellow) 3
32 wrinkled, green © 1

556 seeds 16

Figure 9.5

Independent inheritance
of two separate traits,
shape and colour of seeds

normal two copies that all other cells in the body have? If progeny plants
inherited a single whole gene set from each parent, then the experiment
in Fig. 9.5 cannot work. This is because the two characteristics ‘R’ and
‘y’ would then be linked to each other and cannot be independently
inherited. This is explained by the fact that each gene set is present, not

Heredity and Evolution

145

Page_Number 145 ended
/n
Page_Number 146 started
Male

Gametes /
X Y
Zygote ©)

Offsprings (i
J

Female

Figure 9.6
Sex determination in
human beings

146

as a single long thread of DNA, but as separate independent pieces,
each called a chromosome. Thus, each cell will have two copies of each
chromosome, one each from the male and female parents. Every germ-
cell will take one chromosome from each pair and these may be of either
maternal or paternal origin. When two germ cells combine, they will
restore the normal number of chromosomes in the progeny, ensuring
the stability of the DNA of the species. Such a mechanism of inheritance
explains the results of the Mendel experiments, and is used by all
sexually reproducing organisms. But asexually reproducing organisms
also follow similar rules of inheritance. Can we work out how their
inheritance might work?

9.2.4 Sex Determination

We have discussed the idea that the two sexes participating in sexual
reproduction must be somewhat different from each other for a number
of reasons. How is the sex of a newborn individual

determined? Different species use very different strategies

for this. Some rely entirely on environmental cues. Thus,

in some animals, the temperature at which fertilised eggs

are kept determines whether the animals developing in

the eggs will be male or female. In other animals, such as

snails, individuals can change sex, indicating that sex is

not genetically determined. However, in human beings,

| the sex of the individual is largely genetically determined.

In other words, the genes inherited from our parents

decide whether we will be boys or girls. But so far, we
have assumed that similar gene sets are inherited from
(6) both parents. If that is the case, how can genetic

x

Female

inheritance determine sex?

The explanation lies in the fact that all human
chromosomes are not paired. Most human chromosomes
have a maternal and a paternal copy, and we have 22
such pairs. But one pair, called the sex chromosomes, is
odd in not always being a perfect pair. Women have a
Oo perfect pair of sex chromosomes, both called X. But men
have a mismatched pair in which one is a normal-sized X
y while the other is a short one called Y. So women are XX,
while men are XY. Now, can we work out what the

inheritance pattern of X and Y will be?

As Fig. 9.6 shows, half the children will be boys and
half will be girls. All children will inherit an X chromosome
from their mother regardless of whether they are boys or
girls. Thus, the sex of the children will be determined by
what they inherit from their father. A child who inherits
an X chromosome from her father will be a girl, and one
who inherits a Y chromosome from him will be a boy.

Science

Page_Number 146 ended
/n
Page_Number 147 started
QUESTIONS

How do Mendel’s experiments show that traits may be dominant or
recessive?

How do Mendel’s experiments show that traits are inherited
independently?

A man with blood group A marries a woman with blood group O and

their daughter has blood group O. Is this information enough to tell you
which of the traits —- blood group A or O - is dominant? Why or why not?

How is the sex of the child determined in human beings?

9.3 EVOLUTION

We have noted that there is an inbuilt tendency to variation during
reproduction, both because of errors in DNA copying, and as a result of
sexual reproduction. Let us now look at some consequences of this
tendency.

9.3.1 An Illustration

Consider a group of twelve red beetles. They live, let us assume, in some
bushes with green leaves. Their population will grow by sexual
reproduction, and therefore, can generate variations. Let us imagine also
that crows eat these beetles. The more beetles the crows eat, the fewer
beetles are available to reproduce. Now, let us think about some different
situations (Fig. 9.7) that can develop in this beetle population.

iS BS “ee

Yy Ny
ie We Wee
mane
yy

rein
3 * * ee
Awin Diet Abie

sented et at y tke
Yio vk ee ate —>\ ELEPHANT o> ee
Hote OG Oy aatiate voor Jy > way
See Ste hereees & Bote

i, es

*
Ot en ee ee

Figure 9.7 Variations in a population - inherited and otherwise

In the first situation, a colour variation arises during reproduction,
so that there is one beetle that is green in colour instead of red. This
beetle, moreover, can pass the colour on to its progeny, so that all its

Heredity and Evolution 147

Page_Number 147 ended
/n
Page_Number 148 started
148

progeny beetles are green. Crows cannot see green-coloured beetles on
the green leaves of the bushes, and therefore cannot eat them. What
happens then? The progeny of green beetles is not eaten, while the
progeny of red beetles continues to be eaten. As a result, there are more
and more green beetles than red ones in the beetle population.

In a second situation, again, a colour variation arises during
reproduction, but now it results in a beetle that is blue in colour instead
of red. This beetle can also pass the colour on to its progeny, so that all
its progeny beetles are blue. Crows can see blue-coloured beetles in the
green leaves of the bushes as well as they can see red ones, and therefore
can eat them. What happens initially? In the population, as it expands,
there are a few blue beetles, but most are red. But at this point, an
elephant comes by, and stamps on the bushes where the beetles live.
This kills most of the beetles. By chance, the few beetles that have survived
are mostly blue. The beetle population slowly expands again, but now,
the beetles in the population are mostly blue.

It is obvious that in both situations, what started out as a rare variation
came to be a common characteristic in the population. In other words,
the frequency ofan inherited trait changed over generations. Since genes
control traits, we can say that the frequency of certain genes in a
population changed over generations. This is the essence of the idea of
evolution.

But there are interesting differences, too, in the two situations. In the
first case, the variation became common because it gave a survival
advantage. In other words, it was naturally selected. We can see that the
natural selection is exerted by the crows. The more crows there are, the
more red beetles would be eaten, and the more the proportion of green
beetles in the population would be. Thus, natural selection is directing
evolution in the beetle population. It results in adaptations in the beetle
population to fit their environment better.

In the second situation, the colour change gave no survival advantage.
Instead, it was simply a matter of accidental survival of beetles of one
colour that changed the common characteristic of the resultant
population. The elephant would not have caused such major havoc in
the beetle population if the beetle population had been very large. So,
accidents in small populations can change the frequency of some genes
in a population, even if they give no survival advantage. This is the notion
of genetic drift, which provides diversity without any adaptations.

Now consider a third situation. In this, as the beetle population begins
to expand, the bushes start suffering from a plant disease. The amount
of leaf material for the beetles is reduced. The beetles are poorly nourished
as a result. The average weight of adult beetles decreases from what it
used to be when leaves were plentiful, but there is no genetic change
occurring. After a few years and a few beetle generations of such scarcity,
the plant disease is eliminated. There is a lot of leaf food. At this time,
what would we expect the weight of the beetles to be?

Science

Page_Number 148 ended
/n
Page_Number 149 started
9.3.2 Acquired and Inherited Traits

We discussed the idea that the germ cells of sexually reproducing
populations are made in specialised reproductive tissue. Ifthe weight of
the beetle is reduced because of starvation, that will not change the DNA
of the germ cells. Therefore, low weight is not a trait that can be inherited
by the progeny of a starving beetle. Therefore, even if some generations
of beetles are low in weight because of starvation, that is not an example
of evolution, since the change is not inherited over generations. Change
in non-reproductive tissues cannot be passed on to the DNA of the germ
cells. Therefore the experiences of an individual during its lifetime cannot
be passed on to its progeny, and cannot direct evolution.

Consider another example of how an individual cannot pass on to
its progeny the experiences of its lifetime. If we breed a group of mice, all
their progeny will have tails, as expected. Now, ifthe tails of these mice
are removed by surgery in each generation, do these tailless mice have
tailless progeny? The answer is no, and it makes sense because removal
of the tail cannot change the genes of the germ cells of the mice.

Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882)

Charles Darwin set out on a voyage when he was 22 years old. The
five-year voyage took him to South America and the islands off its coast.
The studies that he conducted during this voyage were to change forever
the way we look at the variety of life on earth. Interestingly, after he got
back to England, he never left its shores again. He stayed at home and
conducted various experiments that led him to formulate his hypothesis

that evolution took place due to natural selection. He did not know the

mechanism whereby variations arose in the species. He would have

been enlightened by Mendel’s experiments, but these two gentlemen

did not know of each other or their work!

We often associate Darwin solely with the theory of evolution. But he was an accomplished
naturalist, and one of the studies he conducted was to do with the role of earthworms in
soil fertility.

This is the reason why the ideas of heredity and genetics that we
have discussed earlier are so essential for understanding evolution. Even
Charles Darwin, who came up with the idea of evolution of species by
natural selection in the nineteenth century, could not work out the
mechanism. It is ironic that he could have done so if he had seen the
significance of the experiments his Austrian contemporary, Gregor
Mendel, was doing. But then, Mendel too did not notice Darwin's work
as relevant to his!

D ¢
Origin of life on earth
Darwin's theory of evolution tells us how life evolved from simple to more complex forms
and Mendel’s experiments give us the mechanism for the inheritance of traits from one
generation to the next. But neither tells us anything about how life began on earth in the
first place.

Heredity and Evolution 149

Page_Number 149 ended
/n
Page_Number 150 started
J.B.S. Haldane, a British scientist (who became a citizen of India later), suggested in
1929 that life must have developed from the simple inorganic molecules which were
present on earth soon after it was formed. He speculated that the conditions on earth
at that time, which were far from the conditions we see today, could have given rise to
more complex organic molecules that were necessary for life. The first primitive
organisms would arise from further chemical synthesis.

How did these organic molecules arise? An answer was suggested by the experiment
conducted by Stanley L. Miller and Harold C. Urey in 1953. They assembled an
atmosphere similar to that thought to exist on early earth (this had molecules like
ammonia, methane and hydrogen sulphide, but no oxygen) over water. This was
maintained at a temperature just below 100°C and sparks were passed through the
mixture of gases to simulate lightning. At the end of a week, 15% of the carbon (from
methane) had been converted to simple compounds of carbon including amino acids
which make up protein molecules. So, can life arise afresh on earth even now?

Q U ES TION S

What are the different ways in which individuals with a particular
trait may increase in a population?

Why are traits acquired during the life-time of an individual not
inherited?

Why are the small numbers of surviving tigers a cause of worry from
the point of view of genetics?

9.4 SPECIATION

What we have seen so far is micro-evolution. That means that the changes
are small, even though they are significant. Also, they simply change the
common characteristics of a particular species. But this does not properly
explain how new species come into existence. That can be said to have
happened only if this group of beetles we are thinking about, splits into
two populations that cannot reproduce with each other. When this
happens, they can be called two independent species. So, can we extend
the reasoning we have used above to explain such speciation?
Consider what would happen if the bushes the beetles feed on are
spread widely over a mountain range. The beetle population becomes
very large as a result. But individual beetles feed mostly on a few nearby
bushes throughout their lifetime. They do not travel far. So, in this huge
population of beetles, there will be sub-populations in neighbourhoods.
Since male and female beetles have to meet for reproduction to happen,
most reproduction will be within these sub-populations. Of course, an
occasional adventurous beetle might go from one site to another. Ora
beetle is picked up by a crow from one site and dropped in the other site
without being eaten. In either case, the migrant beetle will reproduce
with the local population. This will result in the genes of the migrant
beetle entering a new population. This kind of gene flow is bound to

150 Science

Page_Number 150 ended
/n
Page_Number 151 started
happen between populations that are partly, but not completely
separated. If, however, between two such sub-populations a large river
comes into existence, the two populations will be further isolated. The
levels of gene flow between them will decrease even further.

Over generations, genetic drift will accumulate different changes in
each sub-population. Also, natural selection may also operate differently
in these different geographic locations. Thus, for example, in the territory
of one sub-population, crows are eliminated by eagles. But this does
not happen for the other sub-population, where crow numbers are very
high. As a result, the green variation will not be selected at the first site,
while it will be strongly selected at the second.

Together, the processes of genetic drift and natural selection will result
in these two isolated sub-populations of beetles becoming more and
more different from each other. Eventually, members of these two groups
will be incapable of reproducing with each other even if they happen to
meet.

There can be a number of ways by which this can happen. If the
DNA changes are severe enough, such as a change in the number of
chromosomes, eventually the germ cells of the two groups cannot fuse
with each other. Or a new variation emerges in which green females will
not mate with red males, but only with green males. This allows very
strong natural selection for greenness. Now, if such a green female beetle
meets a red male from the other group, her behaviour will ensure that
there is no reproduction between them. Effectively, new species of beetles
are being generated.

What factors could lead to the rise of a new species?

Will geographical isolation be a major factor in the speciation of a self-
pollinating plant species? Why or why not?

Will geographical isolation be a major factor in the speciation of an
organism that reproduces asexually? Why or why not?

9.5 EVOLUTION AND CLASSIFICATION

Based on these principles, we can work out the evolutionary relationships
of the species we see around us. It is a sort of going backwards in time.
We can do this by identifying hierarchies of characteristics between
species. In order to understand this process, let us think back to our
discussion on the classification of organisms in Class IX.

Similarities among organisms will allow us to group them and then
study the groups. For this, which characteristics decide more
fundamental differences among organisms, and which ones decide less
basic differences? What is meant by ‘characteristics’, anyway?
Characteristics are details of appearance or behaviour; in other words, a
particular form or a particular function. That we have four limbs is thus a
characteristic. That plants can do photosynthesis is also a characteristic.

Heredity and Evolution 151

Page_Number 151 ended
/n
Page_Number 152 started
Frog Lizard
Human
Bird \
Figure 9.8

Homologous organs

152

Some basic characteristics will be shared by most organisms. The
cell is the basic unit of life in all organisms. The characteristics in the
next level of classification would be shared by most, but not all organisms.
Abasic characteristic of cell design that differs among different organisms
is whether the cell has a nucleus. Bacterial cells do not, while the cells of
most other organisms do. Among organisms with nucleated cells, which
ones are unicellular and which ones multi-cellular? That property marks
avery basic difference in body design, because of specialisation of cell
types and tissues. Among multi-cellular organisms, whether they can
undertake photosynthesis or not will provide the next level of
classification. Among the multi-cellular organisms that cannot do
photosynthesis, whether the skeleton is inside the body or around the
body will mark another fundamental design difference. We can see that,
even in these few questions that we have asked, a hierarchy is developing
that allows us to make classification groups.

The more characteristics two species will have in common, the more
closely they are related. And the more closely they are related, the more
recently they will have had a common ancestor. An example will help. A
brother and a sister are closely related. They have common ancestors in
the first generation before them, namely, their parents. A girl and her
first cousin are also related, but less than the girl and her brother. This
is because cousins have common ancestors, their grandparents, in the
second generation before them, not in the first one. We can now appreciate
that classification of species is in fact a reflection of their evolutionary
relationship.

We can thus build up small groups of species with recent common
ancestors, then super-groups of these groups with more distant common
ancestors, and so on. In theory, we can keep going backwards like this
until we come to the notion of a single species at the very beginning of
evolutionary time. If that is the case, then at some point in the history of
the earth, non-living material must have given rise to life. There are many
theories about how this might have happened. It would be interesting to
come up with theories of our own!

9.5.1 Tracing Evolutionary Relationships

When we try to follow evolutionary relationships, how do we identify
characteristics as common? These characteristics in different organisms
would be similar because they are inherited from a common ancestor.
As an example, consider the fact that mammals have four limbs, as do
birds, reptiles and amphibians (Fig. 9.8). The basic structure of the limbs
is similar though it has been modified to perform different functions in
various vertebrates. Such a homologous characteristic helps to identify
an evolutionary relationship between apparently different species.
However, all similarities simply in organ shape are not necessarily
because of common ancestry. What would we think about the wings of

Science

Page_Number 152 ended
/n
Page_Number 153 started
birds and bats, for example (Fig. 9.9)? Birds
and bats have wings, but squirrels and
lizards do not. So are birds and bats more

closely related to each other than to squirrels Bird
or lizards?
Before we jump to this conclusion, let us
look at the wings of birds and bats more Figure 9.9
closely. When we do that, we find that the Analogous organs — The wing of a bat and the

wings of bats are skin folds stretched mainly wig of a bird

between elongated fingers. But the wings of

birds are a feathery covering all along the arm. The designs of the two
wings, their structure and components, are thus very different. They
look similar because they have a common use for flying, but their origins
are not common. This makes them analogous characteristics, rather
than homologous characteristics. It would now be interesting to think
about whether bird arms and bat arms should be considered homologous
or analogous!

9.5.2 Fossils

Such studies of organ structure can be done not only on current species,
but also on species that are no longer alive. How do we know that these
extinct species ever existed? We know this from finding fossils (Fig. 9.10).
What are fossils? Usually, when organisms die, their bodies will
decompose and be lost. But every once in a while, the body or at least
some parts may be in an environment that does not let it decompose
completely. Ifa dead insect gets caught in hot mud, for example, it will
not decompose quickly, and the mud will eventually harden and retain
the impression of the body parts of the insect. All such preserved traces
of living organisms are called fossils.

Fossil - tree trunk Fossil — invertebrate
(Ammonite)

Fossil — invertebrate
(Trilobite)

Fossil — fish (Knightia) Fossil — dinosaur skull
(Rajasaurus)

Figure 9.10 Various kind of fossils. Note the different appearances and degrees of detail and preservation.
The dinosaur skull fossil shown was found only a few years ago in the Narmada valley.

Heredity and Evolution

153

Page_Number 153 ended
/n
Page_Number 154 started
How do we know how old the fossils are? There are two components
to this estimation. One is relative. Ifwe dig into the earth and start finding
fossils, it is reasonable to suppose that the fossils we find closer to the
surface are more recent than the fossils we find in deeper layers. The
second way of dating fossils is by detecting the ratios of different isotopes
of the same element in the fossil material. It would be interesting to find
out exactly how this method works!

How do fossils form layer by layer?

Let us start 100 million years ago. Some invertebrates on
the sea-bed die, and are buried in the sand. More sand
accumulates, and sandstone forms under pressure.

Millions of years later, dinosaurs living in the area die, and their bodies, too, are
buried in mud. This mud is also compressed into rock, above the rock containing
the earlier invertebrate fossils.

Again millions ofyears later, the bodies of horse-like creatures dying in the area are
fossilised in rocks above these earlier rocks.

Do You Know?

Much later, by erosion or water flow wears away some of the rock and exposes the
horse-like fossils. As we dig deeper, we will find older and older fossils.

154 Science

Page_Number 154 ended
/n
Page_Number 155 started
9.5.3 Evolution by Stages

A question that arises here is — if complicated organs,
such as the eye, are selected for the advantage they
provide, how can they be generated by a single DNA
change? Surely such complex organs will be created
bit-by-bit over generations? But how can each
intermediate change be selected for? There are a
number of possible explanations. Even an
intermediate stage (Fig. 9.11), such as a rudimentary
eye, can be useful to some extent. This might be
enough to give a fitness advantage. In fact, the eye —
like the wing - seems to be a very popular adaptation.
Insects have them, so does an octopus, and so do
vertebrates. And the structure of the eye in each of
these organisms is different — enough for them to have
separate evolutionary origins.

Also, a change that is useful for one property to
start with can become useful later for quite a different
function. Feathers, for example, can start out as
providing insulation in cold weather (Fig. 9.12). But
later, they might become useful for flight. In fact,
some dinosaurs had feathers, although they could
not fly using the feathers. Birds seem to have later
adapted the feathers to flight. This, of course, means
that birds are very closely related to reptiles, since
dinosaurs were reptiles!

It is all very well to say that very dissimilar-
looking structures evolve from a common ancestral
design. It is true that analysis of the organ structure
in fossils allows us to make estimates of how far back
evolutionary relationships go. But those are guesses
about what happened in history. Are there any
current examples of such a process? The wild
cabbage plant is a good example. Humans have, over
more than two thousand years, cultivated wild
cabbage as a food plant, and generated different
vegetables from it by selection (see Fig. 9.13). This is,
of course, artificial selection rather than natural
selection. So some farmers have wanted to select for
very short distances between leaves, and have bred
the cabbage we eat. Some have wanted to select for
arrested flower development, and have bred broccoli,

Figure 9.11

A flatworm named Planaria has very simple
‘eyes’ that are really just eye-spots which
detect light.

This is a small
dinosaur from
the Dromaesaur
family.

Feather imprints were
preserved along this dinosaur's
bones. Here we can see feathers
on the forearm.

Here's a close-up of the fossil's head feathers.

This dinosaur could not fly, and it is possible that the
evolution of feathers had nothing to do with flight.

Figure 9.12
Dinosaurs and the evolution of feathers

or for sterile flowers, and have made the cauliflower. Some have selected
for swollen parts, and come up with kohlrabi. Some have simply looked
for slightly larger leaves, and come up with a leafy vegetable called kale.
Would we have thought that all these structures are descended from the

same ancestor ifwe had not done it ourselves?

Heredity and Evolution

155

Page_Number 155 ended
/n
Page_Number 156 started
Kohlrabi Wild cabbage

Cauliflower Broccoli Cabbage Red cabbage

Figure 9.13 Evolution of wild cabbage!

Another way of tracing evolutionary relationships depends on the
original idea that we started with. That idea was that changes in DNA
during reproduction are the basic events in evolution. If that is the case,
then comparing the DNA of different species should give us a direct estimate
of how much the DNA has changed during the formation of these species.
This method is now extensively used to define evolutionary relationships.

q
Molecular phylogeny

We have been discussing how changes in the DNA during cell division would lead to changes
in the proteins that are made from this new DNA. Another point that has been made is that
these changes would accumulate from one generation to the next. Could this be used to
trace the changes in DNA backwards in time and find out where each change diverged
from the other? Molecular phylogeny does exactly this. This approach is based on the idea
that organisms which are more distantly related will accumulate a greater number of
differences in their DNA. Such studies trace the evolutionary relationships and it has been
highly gratifying to find that the relationships among different organisms shown by molecular
phylogeny match the classification scheme that we learnt in Class IX.

More to Know!

QUES TION §S

Give an example of characteristics being used to determine how close
two species are in evolutionary terms.

Can the wing of a butterfly and the wing of a bat be considered
homologous organs? Why or why not?

What are fossils? What do they tell us about the process of evolution?

9.6 EVOLUTION SHOULD NOT BE EQUATED WITH
‘PROGRESS’

In an exercise of tracing the family trees of species, we need to remember
certain things. Firstly, there are multiple branches possible at each and

156 Science

Page_Number 156 ended
/n
Page_Number 157 started
every stage of this process. So it is not as if one species is eliminated to
give rise to a new one. A new species has emerged. But that does not
necessarily mean, like the beetle example we have been thinking about,
that the old species will disappear. It will all depend on the environment.
Also, it is not as if the newly generated species are in any way ‘better’
than the older one. It is just that natural selection and genetic drift have
together led to the formation of a population that cannot reproduce with
the original one. So, for example, it is not true that human beings have
evolved from chimpanzees. Rather, both human beings and chimpanzees
have acommon ancestor a long time ago. That common ancestor is likely
to have been neither human or chimpanzee. Also, the first step of
separation from that ancestor is unlikely to have resulted in modern
chimpanzees and human beings. Instead, the two resultant species have
probably evolved in their own separate ways to give rise to the current
forms.

In fact, there is no real ‘progress’ in the idea of evolution. Evolution is
simply the generation of diversity and the shaping of the diversity by
environmental selection. The only progressive trend in evolution seems
to be that more and more complex body designs have emerged over
time. However, again, it is not as if the older designs are inefficient! So
many of the older and simpler designs still survive. In fact, one of the
simplest life forms — bacteria — inhabit the most inhospitable habitats
like hot springs, deep-sea thermal vents and the ice in Antarctica. In
other words, human beings are not the pinnacle of evolution, but simply
yet another species in the teeming spectrum of evolving life.

9.6.1 Human Evolution

The same tools for tracing evolutionary
relationships — excavating, time-dating
and studying fossils, as well as
determining DNA sequences — have
been used for studying human
evolution. There is a great diversity of
human forms and features across the
planet. So much so that, for a long time,
people used to talk about human
‘races’. Skin colour used to be the
commonest way of identifying these so-
called races. Some were called yellow,
some black, white or brown. A major question debated for a long time
was, have these apparent groups evolved differently? Over recent years,
the evidence has become very clear. The answer is that there is no
biological basis to the notion of human races. All humans are a single
species.

Not only that, regardless of where we have lived for the past few
thousand years, we all come from Africa. The earliest members of the
human species, Homo sapiens, can be traced there. Our genetic
footprints can be traced back to our African roots. A couple of hundred
thousand years ago, some of our ancestors left Africa while others stayed

Heredity and Evolution

Figure 9.14
Evolution —
Ladder versus Tree

157

Page_Number 157 ended
/n
Page_Number 158 started
on. While the residents spread across Africa, the migrants slowly spread
across the planet— from Africa to West Asia, then to Central Asia, Eurasia,
South Asia, East Asia. They travelled down the islands of Indonesia and
the Philippines to Australia, and they crossed the Bering land bridge to
the Americas. They did not go in a single line, so they were not travelling
for the sake of travelling, obviously. They went forwards and backwards,
with groups sometimes separating from each other, sometimes coming
back to mix with each other, even moving in and out of Africa. Like all
other species on the planet, they had come into being as an accident of
evolution, and were trying to live their lives the best they could.

Q U ES TION S$

Why are human beings who look so different from each other in terms
of size, colour and looks said to belong to the same species?

In evolutionary terms, can we say which among bacteria, spiders, fish
and chimpanzees have a ‘better’ body design? Why or why not?

= Variations arising during the process of reproduction can be inherited.
= These variations may lead to increased survival of the individuals.

= Sexually reproducing individuals have two copies of genes for the same trait. If the
copies are not identical, the trait that gets expressed is called the dominant trait
and the other is called the recessive trait.

= Traits in one individual may be inherited separately, giving rise to new combinations
of traits in the offspring of sexual reproduction.

= Sex is determined by different factors in various species. In human beings, the sex
of the child depends on whether the paternal chromosome is X (for girls) or Y (for

boys).

= Variations in the species may confer survival advantages or merely contribute to
the genetic drift.

= Changes in the non-reproductive tissues caused by environmental factors are not
inheritable.

= Speciation may take place when variation is combined with geographical isolation.
= Evolutionary relationships are traced in the classification of organisms.

= Tracing common ancestors back in time leads us to the idea that at some point of
time, non-living material must have given rise to life.

= Evolution can be worked out by the study of not just living species, but also fossils.

= Complex organs may have evolved because of the survival advantage of even the
intermediate stages.

= Organs or features may be adapted to new functions during the course of evolution.
For example, feathers are thought to have been initially evolved for warmth and
later adapted for flight.

158 Science

Page_Number 158 ended
/n
Page_Number 159 started
Evolution cannot be said to ‘progress’ from ‘lower’ forms to ‘higher’ forms. Rather,
evolution seems to have given rise to more complex body designs even while the
simpler body designs continue to flourish.

Study of the evolution of human beings indicates that all of us belong to a single
species that evolved in Africa and spread across the world in stages.

EX ERC S ES

A Mendelian experiment consisted of breeding tall pea plants bearing violet flowers
with short pea plants bearing white flowers. The progeny all bore violet flowers,
but almost half of them were short. This suggests that the genetic make-up of the
tall parent can be depicted as

(a) TIWWw

(b) TIww

(c) Ttww

(a) Ttww

An example of homologous organs is
(a) our arm and a dog’s fore-leg.

(b) our teeth and an elephant’s tusks.
(c) potato and runners of grass.

(d) all of the above.

In evolutionary terms, we have more in common with
(a) aChinese school-boy.

(b) achimpanzee.

(c) aspider.

(d) a bacterium.

A study found that children with light-coloured eyes are likely to have parents
with light-coloured eyes. On this basis, can we say anything about whether the
light eye colour trait is dominant or recessive? Why or why not?

How are the areas of study — evolution and classification — interlinked?
Explain the terms analogous and homologous organs with examples.
Outline a project which aims to find the dominant coat colour in dogs.
Explain the importance of fossils in deciding evolutionary relationships.

What evidence do we have for the origin of life from inanimate matter?

Explain how sexual reproduction gives rise to more viable variations than asexual
reproduction. How does this affect the evolution of those organisms that reproduce
sexually?

How is the equal genetic contribution of male and female parents ensured in the
progeny?

Only variations that confer an advantage to an individual organism will survive in
a population. Do you agree with this statement? Why or why not?

Heredity and Evolution 159

Page_Number 159 ended
/n
Page_Number 160 started
More to Know!

CHAPTER 1 0
Light — Reflection and
Refraction

W: see a variety of objects in the world around us. However, we are
unable to see anything in a dark room. On lighting up the room,
things become visible. What makes things visible? During the day, the
sunlight helps us to see objects. An object reflects light that falls on it.
This reflected light, when received by our eyes, enables us to see things.
We are able to see through a transparent medium as light is transmitted
through it. There are a number of common wonderful phenomena
associated with light such as image formation by mirrors, the twinkling
of stars, the beautiful colours ofa rainbow, bending of light by a medium
and so on. A study of the properties of light helps us to explore them.
By observing the common optical phenomena around us, we may
conclude that light seems to travel in straight lines. The fact that a small
source of light casts a sharp shadow of an opaque object points to this
straight-line path of light, usually indicated as a ray of light.

If an 1 opaque object on the path of light becomes very small, light has a tendency to
bend around it and not walk in a straight line - an effect known as the diffraction of
light. Then the straight-line treatment of optics using rays fails. To explain phenomena
such as diffraction, light is thought of as a wave, the details of which you will study

in higher classes. Again, at the beginning of the 20" century, it became known that
the wave theory of light often becomes inadequate for treatment of the interaction of
light with matter, and light often behaves somewhat like a stream of particles. This
confusion about the true nature of light continued for some years till a modern
quantum theory of light emerged in which light is neither a ‘wave’ nor a ‘particle’ —
the new theory reconciles the particle properties of light with the wave nature.

In this Chapter, we shall study the phenomena of reflection and
refraction of light using the straight-line propagation of light. These basic
concepts will help us in the study of some of the optical phenomena in
nature. We shall try to understand in this Chapter the reflection of light
by spherical mirrors and refraction of light and their application in real
life situations.

10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHT

A highly polished surface, such as a mirror, reflects most of the light
falling on it. You are already familiar with the laws of reflection of light.

Page_Number 160 ended
/n
Page_Number 161 started
Let us recall these laws —
(i) The angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection, and
(ii) The incident ray, the normal to the mirror at the point of incidence
and the reflected ray, all lie in the same plane.

These laws of reflection are applicable to all types of reflecting surfaces
including spherical surfaces. You are familiar with the formation of image
by a plane mirror. What are the properties of the image? Image formed
by a plane mirror is always virtual and erect. The size of the image is
equal to that of the object. The image formed is as far behind the mirror
as the object is in front of it. Further, the image is laterally inverted.
How would the images be when the reflecting surfaces are curved? Let
us explore.

Activity 10.1

Take a large shining spoon. Try to view your face in its curved
surface.

Do you get the image? Is it smaller or larger?

Move the spoon slowly away from your face. Observe the image.
How does it change?

Reverse the spoon and repeat the Activity. How does the image
look like now?

Compare the characteristics of the image on the two surfaces.

The curved surface of a shining spoon could be considered as a curved
mirror. The most commonly used type of curved mirror is the spherical
mirror. The reflecting surface of such mirrors can be considered to form
a part of the surface ofa sphere. Such mirrors, whose reflecting surfaces
are spherical, are called spherical mirrors. We shall now study about
spherical mirrors in some detail.

10.2 SPHERICAL MIRRORS

The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror may be curved inwards or
outwards. A spherical mirror, whose reflecting surface is curved inwards,
that is, faces towards the centre of the sphere, is called a concave mirror.
Aspherical mirror whose reflecting surface is curved outwards, is called
a convex mirror. The schematic representation of these mirrors is shown
in Fig. 10.1. You may note in these diagrams that the back
of the mirror is shaded.

You may now understand that the surface of the spoon
curved inwards can be approximated to a concave mirror
and the surface of the spoon bulged outwards can be
approximated to a convex mirror.

Before we move further on spherical mirrors, we need to
recognise and understand the meaning ofa few terms. These

terms are commonly used in discussions about spherical (a) Concave mirror

mirrors. The centre of the reflecting surface of a spherical Figure 10.1

(b) Convex mirror

mirror is a point called the pole. It lies on the surface of the — Schematic representation of spherical
mirror. The pole is usually represented by the letter P. mirrors; the shaded side is non-reflecting.

Light — Reflection and Refraction

161

Page_Number 161 ended
/n
Page_Number 162 started
At
infinity

The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror forms a part of a sphere.
This sphere has a centre. This point is called the centre of curvature of
the spherical mirror. It is represented by the letter C. Please note that the
centre of curvature is not a part of the mirror. It lies outside its reflecting
surface. The centre of curvature of a concave mirror lies in front of it.
However, it lies behind the mirror in case of a convex mirror. You may
note this in Fig. 10.2 (a) and (b). The radius of the sphere of which the
reflecting surface of a spherical mirror forms a part, is called the radius
of curvature of the mirror. It is represented by the letter R. You may note
that the distance PC is equal to the radius of curvature. Imagine a straight
line passing through the pole and the centre of curvature of a spherical
mirror. This line is called the principal axis. Remember that principal
axis is normal to the mirror at its pole. Let us understand an important
term related to mirrors, through an Activity.

Activity 10.2

CAUTION: Do not look at the Sun directly or even into a mirror
reflecting sunlight. It may damage your eyes.

Hold a concave mirror in your hand and direct its reflecting surface
towards the Sun.

Direct the light reflected by the mirror on to a sheet of paper held
close to the mirror.

Move the sheet of paper back and forth gradually until you find
on the paper sheet a bright, sharp spot of light.

Hold the mirror and the paper in the same position for a few
minutes. What do you observe? Why?

The paper at first begins to burn producing smoke. Eventually it
may even catch fire. Why does it burn? The light from the Sun is converged
at a point, as a sharp, bright spot by the mirror. In fact, this spot of light
is the image of the Sun on the sheet of paper. This point is
the focus of the concave mirror. The heat produced due to
the concentration of sunlight ignites the paper. The distance
of this image from the position of the mirror gives the
approximate value of focal length of the mirror.

Let us try to understand this observation with the help
ofa ray diagram.

Observe Fig. 10.2 (a) closely. Anumber of rays parallel
to the principal axis are falling on a concave mirror. Observe
the reflected rays. They are all meeting/intersecting at a
point on the principal axis of the mirror. This point is called

B
At
infinity

Figure 10.2
(a) Concave mirror
(b) Convex mirror

162

the principal focus of the concave mirror. Similarly, observe
Fig. 10.2 (b). How are the rays parallel to the principal axis,
reflected by a convex mirror? The reflected rays appear to
come from a point on the principal axis. This point is called
the principal focus of the convex mirror. The principal focus
is represented by the letter F. The distance between the
pole and the principal focus of a spherical mirror is called
the focal length. It is represented by the letter _/.

of

Science

Page_Number 162 ended
/n
Page_Number 163 started
The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror is by and large spherical.
The surface, then, has a circular outline. The diameter of the reflecting
surface of spherical mirror is called its aperture. In Fig.10.2, distance
MN represents the aperture. We shall consider in our discussion only
such spherical mirrors whose aperture is much smaller than its radius
of curvature.

Is there a relationship between the radius of curvature R, and focal
length /; of a spherical mirror? For spherical mirrors of small apertures,
the radius of curvature is found to be equal to twice the focal length. We
put this as R= 2f. This implies that the principal focus of a spherical
mirror lies midway between the pole and centre of curvature.

10.2.1 Image Formation by Spherical Mirrors

You have studied about the image formation by plane mirrors. You also
know the nature, position and relative size of the images formed by them.
How about the images formed by spherical mirrors? How can we locate
the image formed by a concave mirror for different positions of the object?
Are the images real or virtual? Are they enlarged, diminished or have
the same size? We shall explore this with an Activity.

Activity 10.3

You have already learnt a way of determining the focal length of a
concave mirror. In Activity 10.2, you have seen that the sharp bright
spot of light you got on the paper is, in fact, the image of the Sun. It
was a tiny, real, inverted image. You got the approximate focal length
of the concave mirror by measuring the distance of the image from
the mirror.
Take a concave mirror. Find out its approximate focal length in
the way described above. Note down the value of focal length. (You
can also find it out by obtaining image of a distant object on a
sheet of paper.)
Mark a line on a Table with a chalk. Place the concave mirror on
a stand. Place the stand over the line such that its pole lies over
the line.
Draw with a chalk two more lines parallel to the previous line
such that the distance between any two successive lines is equal
to the focal length of the mirror. These lines will now correspond
to the positions of the points P, F and C, respectively. Remember —
For a spherical mirror of small aperture, the principal focus F lies
mid-way between the pole P and the centre of curvature C.
Keep a bright object, say a burning candle, at a position far beyond
C. Place a paper screen and move it in front of the mirror till you
obtain a sharp bright image of the candle flame on it.
Observe the image carefully. Note down its nature, position and
relative size with respect to the object size.
Repeat the activity by placing the candle - (a) just beyond C,
(b) at C, (c) between F and C, (d) at F, and (e) between P and F.
In one of the cases, you may not get the image on the screen.
Identify the position of the object in such a case. Then, look for its
virtual image in the mirror itself.

Note down and tabulate your observations.

Light — Reflection and Refraction

163

Page_Number 163 ended
/n
Page_Number 164 started
You will see in the above Activity that the nature, position and size of
the image formed by a concave mirror depends on the position of the
object in relation to points P, F and C. The image formed is real for some
positions of the object. It is found to be a virtual image for a certain other
position. The image is either magnified, reduced or has the same size,
depending on the position of the object. A summary of these observations
is given for your reference in Table 10.1.

Table 10.1 Image formation by a concave mirror for different positions of the object

Position of the Position of the Size of the Nature of the
object image image image

At infinity

Beyond C

At C

Between C and F
AUF

Between P and F

164

At the focus F Highly diminished, Real and inverted
point-sized

Between F and C Diminished Real and inverted

At C Same size Real and inverted

Beyond C Enlarged Real and inverted

At infinity Highly enlarged Real and inverted

Behind the mirror Enlarged Virtual and erect

10.2.2 Representation of Images Formed by Spherical
Mirrors Using Ray Diagrams

We can also study the formation of images by spherical mirrors by
drawing ray diagrams. Consider an extended object, of finite size, placed
in front of a spherical mirror. Each small portion of the extended object
acts like a point source. An infinite number of rays originate from each
of these points. To construct the ray diagrams, in order to locate the
image of an object, an arbitrarily large number of rays emanating from a
point could be considered. However, it is more convenient to consider
only two rays, for the sake of clarity of the ray diagram. These rays are
so chosen that it is easy to know their directions after reflection from the
mirror.

The intersection of at least two reflected rays give the position of image
of the point object. Any two of the following rays can be considered for
locating the image.

(i) A ray parallel to the
principal axis, after
reflection, will pass through
the principal focus in case of
a concave mirror or appear
to diverge from the principal
focus in case of a convex
mirror. This is illustrated in

Figure 10.3 Fig.10.3 (a) and (b).

Science

Page_Number 164 ended
/n
Page_Number 165 started
(ii) A ray passing through the
principal focus of a concave
mirror or a ray which is
directed towards the
principal focus of a convex
mirror, after reflection, will
emerge parallel to the
principal axis. This is
illustrated in Fig.10.4 (a)
and (b).

(iii) A ray passing through the Figure 10.4

centre of curvature of a

concave mirror or directed

in the direction of the centre

of curvature of a convex Pp
mirror, after reflection, is
reflected back along the
same path. This is
illustrated in Fig.10.5 (a)
and (b). The light rays come @ 0)
back along the same path
because the incident rays
fall on the mirror along the
normal to the reflecting
surface.

Figure 10.5

(iv) A ray incident obliquely to
the principal axis, towards
a point P (pole of the mirror),
on the concave mirror
[Fig. 10.6 (a)] or a convex .
mirror [Fig. 10.6 (b)], is Cc FE rl
reflected obliquely. The
incident and reflected rays
follow the laws of reflection
at the point of incidence
(point P), making equal Figure 10.6
angles with the principal axis.

ye
for}

Remember that in all the above cases the laws of reflection are followed.
At the point of incidence, the incident ray is reflected in such a way that
the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.

(a) Image formation by Concave Mirror
Figure 10.7 illustrates the ray diagrams for the formation of image
by a concave mirror for various positions of the object.

Light — Reflection and Refraction 165

Page_Number 165 ended
/n
Page_Number 166 started
At
infinity

TAL
infinity

(e)

Figure 10.7 Ray diagrams for the image formation by a concave mirror

Activity 10.4

Draw neat ray diagrams for each position of the object shown in
Table 10.1.

You may take any two of the rays mentioned in the previous section
for locating the image.

Compare your diagram with those given in Fig. 10.7.

Describe the nature, position and relative size of the image formed
in each case.

Tabulate the results in a convenient format.

Uses of concave mirrors

Concave mirrors are commonly used in torches, search-lights and
vehicles headlights to get powerful parallel beams of light. They are
often used as shaving mirrors to see a larger image of the face. The
dentists use concave mirrors to see large images of the teeth of patients.
Large concave mirrors are used to concentrate sunlight to produce
heat in solar furnaces.

(b) Image formation by a Convex Mirror
We studied the image formation by a concave mirror. Now we shall
study the formation of image by a convex mirror.

166 Science

Page_Number 166 ended
/n
Page_Number 167 started
Activity 10.5

= Take a convex mirror. Hold it in one hand.

= Hold a pencil in the upright position in the other hand.

= Observe the image of the pencil in the mirror. Is the image erect or
inverted? Is it diminished or enlarged?

= Move the pencil away from the mirror slowly. Does the image
become smaller or larger’?

= Repeat this Activity carefully. State whether the image will move
closer to or farther away from the focus as the object is moved
away from the mirror?

We consider two positions of the object for studying the image formed
by a convex mirror. First is when the object is at infinity and the second
position is when the object is at a finite distance from the mirror. The ray
diagrams for the formation of image by a convex mirror for these two
positions of the object are shown in Fig. 10.8 (a) and (b), respectively.
The results are summarised in Table 10.2.

ar

infinity

(a)

Figure 10.8 Formation of image by a convex mirror

Table 10.2 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a convex mirror

Position of the Position of the Size of the Nature of the
object image image image

At infinity At the focus F, Highly diminished. Virtual and erect
behind the mirror point-sized
Between infinity Between P and F, Diminished Virtual and erect

and the pole P of behind the mirror
the mirror

You have so far studied the image formation by a plane mirror, a
concave mirror and a convex mirror. Which of these mirrors will give the
full image of a large object? Let us explore through an Activity.

Activity 10.6

= Observe the image of a distant object, say a distant tree, in a
plane mirror.
= Could you see a full-length image?

Light — Reflection and Refraction 167

Page_Number 167 ended
/n
Page_Number 168 started
Try with plane mirrors of different sizes. Did you see the entire
object in the image?

Repeat this Activity with a concave mirror. Did the mirror show
full length image of the object?

Now try using a convex mirror. Did you succeed? Explain your
observations with reason.

You can see a full-length image of a tall building/tree in a small
convex mirror. One such mirror is fitted in a wall of Agra Fort. Ifyou visit
the Agra Fort, try to observe the full-length image of a distant, tall
building/tomb in the wall mirror. To view the tomb distinctly, you should
stand suitably at the terrace adjoining the wall.

Uses of convex mirrors

Convex mirrors are commonly used as rear-view (wing) mirrors in
vehicles. These mirrors are fitted on the sides of the vehicle, enabling the
driver to see traffic behind him/her to facilitate safe driving. Convex
mirrors are preferred because they always give an erect, though
diminished, image. Also, they have a wider field of view as they are curved
outwards. Thus, convex mirrors enable the driver to view much larger
area than would be possible with a plane mirror.

Q U ES TION §S

168

Define the principal focus of a concave mirror.

The radius of curvature of a spherical mirror is 20 cm. What is its focal
length?

Name a mirror that can give an erect and enlarged image of an object.

Why do we prefer a convex mirror as a rear-view mirror in vehicles?

10.2.3 Sign Convention for Reflection by Spherical Mirrors

While dealing with the reflection of light by spherical mirrors, we shall
follow a set of sign conventions called the New Cartesian Sign
Convention. In this convention, the pole (P) of the mirror is taken as the
origin. The principal axis of the mirror is taken as the x-axis (X"X) of the
coordinate system. The conventions are as follows —

(i) The object is always placed to the left of the mirror. This implies
that the light from the object falls on the mirror from the left-hand
side.

(ii) All distances parallel to the principal axis are measured from the
pole of the mirror.

(iii) All the distances measured to the right of the origin (along
+ x-axis) are taken as positive while those measured to the left of
the origin (along — x-axis) are taken as negative.

(iv) Distances measured perpendicular to and above the principal axis
(along + y-axis) are taken as positive.

(v) Distances measured perpendicular to and below the principal axis
(along -y-axis) are taken as negative.

Science

Page_Number 168 ended
/n
Page_Number 169 started
The New Cartesian Sign Convention described above is illustrated in
Fig. 10.9 for your reference. These sign conventions are applied to obtain
the mirror formula and solve related numerical problems.

10.2.4 Mirror Formula and Magnification

In a spherical mirror, the distance of the
object from its pole is called the object — Piect on the left

M
distance (u). The distance of the image from Direction of
the pole of the mirror is called the image A incident light
distance (v). You already know that the
distance of the principal focus from the pole ieee ‘as | __ Distance towards Distance towards
is called the focal length (f). There is a (+ve) <The left Cve) the right (+ve)
relationship between these three quantities x
given by the mirror formula which is B B
expressed as
Height

1 it _ i (10.1) downwards (-ve)

pou f x
This formula is valid in all situations for all Mirror]
spherical mirrors for all positions of the N

object. You must use the New Cartesian Sign Figure 10.9
Convention while substituting numerical
values for u, v,_f, and R in the mirror formula
for solving problems.

Magnification

Magnification produced by a spherical mirror gives the relative extent to
which the image of an object is magnified with respect to the object size.
It is expressed as the ratio of the height of the image to the height of the
object. It is usually represented by the letter m.

If his the height of the object and h’is the height of the image, then
the magnification m produced by a spherical mirror is given by

Height of the image (h’)
Height of the object (h)

m=

h’
h

m= (10.2)

The magnification m is also related to the object distance (u) and
image distance (v). It can be expressed as:

i h’ v

Magnification (m) = how (10.3)

You may note that the height of the object is taken to be positive as
the object is usually placed above the principal axis. The height of the
image should be taken as positive for virtual images. However, it is to be
taken as negative for real images. A negative sign in the value of the
magnification indicates that the image is real. A positive sign in the value
of the magnification indicates that the image is virtual.

Light — Reflection and Refraction

The New Cartesian Sign Convention for spherical mirrors

169

Page_Number 169 ended
/n
Page_Number 170 started
170

Example 10.1

Aconvex mirror used for rear-view on an automobile has a radius of
curvature of 3.00 m. If a bus is located at 5.00 m from this mirror,
find the position, nature and size of the image.

Solution

Radius of curvature, R = + 3.00 m;
Object-distance, u=-5.00m;
Image-distance, v=?

Height of the image, h’= ?

Focal length, f= R/2=+ a =+1.50m

S|

oe tees
Since Du

111 1 1 1 1
Oy f u =+t 1.50 ~ ( 5.00) = 1.507 5.00

_ 5.00 1.50
"7.50
v= 47.50 =+1.15m
~ 6.50 9
The image is 1.15 m at the back of the mirror.
M ificati hiv 115m
agnification, m= >= — 7 = - Soom
=+0.23

The image is virtual, erect and smaller in size by a factor of 0.23.

Example 10.2

An object, 4.0 cm in size, is placed at 25.0 cm in front of a concave
mirror of focal length 15.0 cm. At what distance from the mirror
should a screen be placed in order to obtain a sharp image? Find
the nature and the size of the image.

Solution

Object-size, h= + 4.0 cm;
Object-distance, u=- 25.0 cm;
Focal length, f= -15.0 cm;
Image-distance, v=?
Image-size, h’= ?

From Eq. (10.1):

Pitlk
vou f
1 1 1 1 1 1 1

or, = = - =o +
v f ui -15.0 -25.0 15.0 25.0

Science

Page_Number 170 ended
/n
Page_Number 171 started
or, b= 230+ 3.0 _ -2.0
an) 75.0 75.0
The screen should be placed at 37.5 cm from the mirror. The image

is real.

or, v=-37.5cem

v
Also, ification, m= =--
iso, magnification, m h 7"

, vh _ (87.5cm) (+4.0cm)
or, W’= ~~ = (25.0 cm)

Height of the image, h’=- 6.0 cm
The image is inverted and enlarged.

Q U ES TION S$

Find the focal length of a convex mirror whose radius of curvature is
32 cm.

A concave mirror produces three times magnified (enlarged) real image
of an object placed at 10 cm in front of it. Where is the image located?

10.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT

Light seems to travel along straight-line paths in a transparent medium.
What happens when light enters from one transparent medium to
another? Does it still move along a straight-line path or change its
direction? We shall recall some of our day-to-day experiences.

You might have observed that the bottom of a tank or a pond
containing water appears to be raised. Similarly, when a thick glass slab
is placed over some printed matter, the letters appear raised when viewed
through the glass slab. Why does it happen? Have you seen a pencil
partly immersed in water in a glass tumbler? It appears to be displaced
at the interface of air and water. You might have observed that a lemon
kept in water in a glass tumbler appears to be bigger than its actual
size, when viewed from the sides. How can you account for such
experiences?

Let us consider the case of the apparent displacement of a pencil,
partly immersed in water. The light reaching you from the portion of the
pencil inside water seems to come from a different direction, compared
to the part above water. This makes the pencil appear to be displaced at
the interface. For similar reasons, the letters appear to be raised, when
seen through a glass slab placed over it.

Does a pencil appear to be displaced to the same extent, if instead of
water, we use liquids like kerosene or turpentine? Will the letters appear
to rise to the same height if we replace a glass slab with a transparent
plastic slab? You will find that the extent of the effect is different for
different pair of media. These observations indicate that light does not

Light — Reflection and Refraction 171

Page_Number 171 ended
/n
Page_Number 172 started
172

travel in the same direction in all media. It appears that when travelling
obliquely from one medium to another, the direction of propagation of
light in the second medium changes. This phenomenon is known as
refraction of light. Let us understand this phenomenon further by doing

a few activities.

Activity 10.7

Place a coin at the bottom of a bucket filled with water.

With your eye to a side above water, try to pick up the coin in one
go. Did you succeed in picking up the coin?

Repeat the Activity. Why did you not succeed in doing it in one go?
Ask your friends to do this. Compare your experience with theirs.

Activity 10.8

Place a large shallow bowl on a Table and put a coin in it.

Move away slowly from the bowl. Stop when the coin just
disappears from your sight.

Ask a friend to pour water gently into the bowl without disturbing
the coin.

Keep looking for the coin from your position. Does the coin becomes
visible again from your position? How could this happen?

The coin becomes visible again on pouring water into the bowl. The
coin appears slightly raised above its actual position due to refraction of

light.

Activity 10.9

Draw a thick straight line in ink, over a sheet of white paper placed
on a Table.

Place a glass slab over the line in such a way that one of its edges
makes an angle with the line.

Look at the portion of the line under the slab from the sides. What
do you observe? Does the line under the glass slab appear to be
bent at the edges?

Next, place the glass slab such that it is normal to the line. What
do you observe now? Does the part of the line under the glass slab
appear bent?

Look at the line from the top of the glass slab. Does the part of the
line, beneath the slab, appear to be raised? Why does this happen?

10.3.1 Refraction through a Rectangular Glass Slab

To understand the phenomenon of refraction of light through a glass

slab, let us do an Activity.

Science

Page_Number 172 ended
/n
Page_Number 173 started
Activity 10.10

Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board using drawing pins.
Place a rectangular glass slab over the sheet in the middle.
Draw the outline of the slab with a pencil. Let us name the outline
as ABCD.

Take four identical pins.

Fix two pins, say E and F, vertically such that the line joining the
pins is inclined to the edge AB.

Look for the images of the pins E and F through the opposite edge.
Fix two other pins, say G and H, such that these pins and the
images of E and F lie on a straight line.

Remove the pins and the slab.

Join the positions of tip of the pins E and F and produce the line
up to AB. Let EF meet AB at O. Similarly, join the positions of tip
of the pins G and H and produce it up to the edge CD. Let HG
meet CD at O%

Join O and O’% Also produce EF up to P, as shown by a dotted line

in Fig. 10.10.

In this Activity, you will note, the light ray has changed its direction
at points O and O” Note that both the points O and O’ lie on surfaces
separating two transparent media. Draw a perpendicular NN’ to AB at O
and another perpendicular MM’ to CD at O% The light ray at point O has
entered from a rarer medium to a denser medium, that is, from air to

glass. Note that the light ray has bent towards
the normal. At O’, the light ray has entered
from glass to air, that is, from a denser
medium to a rarer medium. The light here
has bent away from the normal. Compare the
angle of incidence with the angle of refraction
at both refracting surfaces AB and CD.

In Fig. 10.10, EO is the incident ray, OO”
is the refracted ray and O’H is the emergent
ray. You may observe that the emergent ray
is parallel to the direction of the incident ray.
Why does it happen so? The extent of bending
of the ray of light at the opposite parallel faces
AB (air-glass interface) and CD (glass-air
interface) of the rectangular glass slab is
equal and opposite. This is why the ray
emerges parallel to the incident ray. However,
the light ray is shifted sideward slightly. What
happens when a light ray is incident
normally to the interface of two media? Try
and find out.

Air
A B
Glass
Glass —>}
slab
Cc D Air
Figure 10.10

Refraction of light through a rectangular glass slab

Now you are familiar with the refraction of light. Refraction is due to
change in the speed of light as it enters from one transparent medium to
another. Experiments show that refraction of light occurs according to

certain laws.

Light — Reflection and Refraction

173

Page_Number 173 ended
/n
Page_Number 174 started
The following are the laws of refraction of light.

(i) The incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal to the
interface of two transparent media at the point of incidence, all
lie in the same plane.

(ii) The ratio of sine of angle of incidence to the sine af angle of
refraction is a constant, for the light of a given colour and for
the given pair of media. This law is also known as Snell's law of
refraction.

If iis the angle of incidence and ris the angle of refraction, then,

sini

- = constant (10.4)
sinr

This constant value is called the refractive index of the second medium
with respect to the first. Let us study about refractive index in some detail.

10.3.2 The Refractive Index

You have already studied that a ray of light that travels obliquely from
one transparent medium into another will change its direction in the
second medium. The extent of the change in direction that takes place
in a given pair of media is expressed in terms of the refractive index, the
“constant” appearing on the right-hand side of Eq.(10.4).

The refractive index can be linked to an important physical quantity,
the relative speed of propagation of light in different media. It turns out
that light propagates with different speeds in different media. Light travels
the fastest in vacuum with the highest speed of 3x10° ms". In air, the
speed of light is only marginally less, compared to that in vacuum. It
reduces considerably in glass or water. The value of the refractive index
for a given pair of media depends upon the speed of light in the two
media, as given below.

Consider a ray of light travelling from medium 1 into medium 2, as
shown in Fig.10.11. Let v, be the speed of light in medium 1 and v, be
the speed of light in medium 2. The refractive index of medium 2 with
respect to medium 1 is given by the ratio of the speed of light in medium
1 and the speed of light in medium 2. This is usually represented by the
symbol n,,. This can be expressed in an equation form as

Medium 1 _ Speed of light in medium 1 _v

(Ai = = 10.5
An) 21 Speed of light in medium 2 vy, ( }
es 2 By the same argument, the refractive index of medium
1 with respect to medium 2 is represented as n,,. It is given
by
Speed of light in medium 2 _ v.
wo & =2 (10.6)

~ Speed of light in medium 1 7 v

If medium 1 is vacuum or air, then the refractive index of medium 2
is considered with respect to vacuum. This is called the absolute refractive
index of the medium. It is simply represented as n,. Ifc is the speed of

174 Science

Page_Number 174 ended
/n
Page_Number 175 started
light in air and vis the speed of light in the medium, then, the refractive
index of the medium n,, is given by
Speed of light in air Cc

n= : - = (10.7)
™ Speed of light in the medium — v

The absolute refractive index of a medium is simply called its refractive
index. The refractive index of several media is given in Table 10.3. From
the Table you can know that the refractive index of water, n,, = 1.33.
This means that the ratio of the speed of light in air and the speed of
light in water is equal to 1.33. Similarly, the refractive index of crown
glass, n, =1.52. Such data are helpful in many places. However, you
need not memorise the data.

Table 10.3 Absolute refractive index of some material media

Material Refractive Material Refractive
medium index medium index

1.0003 Canada 1.53

Balsam

Ice 1.31

Water 1.33 Rock salt 1.54

Alechol 1.36

Kerosene 1.44 Carbon 1.63
disulphide

Fused 1.46

quartz Dense 1.65
flint glass

Turpentine 1.47

oil Ruby 1.71

Benzene 1.50
Sapphire 1.77

Crown 1.52

glass Diamond 2.42

Note from Table 10.3 that an optically denser medium may not
possess greater mass density. For example, kerosene having higher
refractive index, is optically denser than water, although its mass density
is less than water.

The ability of a medium to refract light is also expressed in terms of its optical density.
Optical density has a definite connotation. It is not the same as mass density. We have
been using the terms ‘rarer medium’ and ‘denser medium’ in this Chapter. It actually
means ‘optically rarer medium’ and ‘optically denser medium’, respectively. When can

we Say that a medium is optically denser than the other? In comparing two media, the
one with the larger refractive index is optically denser medium than the other. The other
medium of lower refractive index is optically rarer. The speed of light is higher in a rarer
medium than a denser medium. Thus, a ray of light travelling from a rarer medium to a
denser medium slows down and bends towards the normal. When it travels from a
denser medium to a rarer medium, it speeds up and bends away from the normal.

More to Know!

Light — Reflection and Refraction 175

Page_Number 175 ended
/n
Page_Number 176 started
QU ES TION §S

A ray of light travelling in air enters obliquely into water. Does the light
ray bend towards the normal or away from the normal? Why?

Light enters from air to glass having refractive index 1.50. What is the
speed of light in the glass? The speed of light in vacuum is 3 x 10° ms".
Find out, from Table 10.3, the medium having highest optical density.
Also find the medium with lowest optical density.

You are given kerosene, turpentine and water. In which of these does
the light travel fastest? Use the information given in Table 10.3.

The refractive index of diamond is 2.42. What is the meaning of this
statement?

10.3.3 Refraction by Spherical Lenses

You might have seen people using spectacles for reading. The
watchmakers use a small magnifying glass to see tiny parts. Have you
ever touched the surface of a magnifying glass with your hand? Is it
plane surface or curved? Is it thicker in the middle or at the edges? The
glasses used in spectacles and that by a watchmaker are examples of
lenses. What is a lens? How does it bend light rays? We shall discuss
these in this section.

A transparent material bound by two
surfaces, of which one or both surfaces are
spherical, forms a lens. This means that a lens is
bound by at least one spherical surface. In such
lenses, the other surface would be plane. A lens
may have two spherical surfaces, bulging
outwards. Such a lens is called a double convex
lens. It is simply called a convex lens. It is thicker
at the middle as compared to the edges.
Convex lens converges light rays as shown in
Fig. 10.12 (a). Hence convex lenses are called
converging lenses. Similarly, a double concave
lens is bounded by two spherical surfaces,
curved inwards. It is thicker at the edges than at
the middle. Such lenses diverge light rays as
shown in Fig. 10.12 (b). Such lenses are called
diverging lenses. A double concave lens is simply
called a concave lens.

Figure 10.12 Alens, either a convex lens or a concave lens,
(a) Converging action of aconvextens, (b) diverging has two spherical surfaces. Each of these surfaces
action ofa concave lens forms a part of a sphere. The centres of these
spheres are called centres of curvature of the lens.

The centre of curvature of a lens is usually represented by the letter C.

Since there are two centres of curvature, we may represent them as C,

and C,. An imaginary straight line passing through the two centres of

176 Science

Page_Number 176 ended
/n
Page_Number 177 started
curvature of a lens is called its principal axis. The central point of a lens is
its optical centre. It is usually represented by the letter O. A ray of light
through the optical centre of a lens passes without suffering any deviation.
The effective diameter of the circular outline of a spherical lens is called its
aperture. We shall confine our discussion in this Chapter to such lenses
whose aperture is much less than its radius of curvature. Such lenses are
called thin lenses with small apertures. What happens when parallel rays
of light are incident on a lens? Let us do an Activity to understand this.

Activity 10.11

CAUTION: Do not look at the Sun directly or through a lens while
doing this Activity or otherwise. You may damage your eyes if you
do so.

Hold a convex lens in your hand. Direct it towards the Sun.
Focus the light from the Sun on a sheet of paper. Obtain a sharp
bright image of the Sun.

Hold the paper and the lens in the same position for a while. Keep
observing the paper. What happened? Why? Recall your experience
in Activity 10.2.

The paper begins to burn producing smoke. It may even catch fire
after a while. Why does this happen? The light from the Sun constitutes
parallel rays of light. These rays were converged by the lens at the sharp
bright spot formed on the paper. In fact, the bright spot you got on the
paper is a real image of the Sun. The concentration of the sunlight at a
point generated heat. This caused the paper to burn.

Now, we shall consider rays of light parallel to the principal axis of a
lens. What happens when you pass such rays of light through a lens?
This is illustrated for a convex lens in Fig. 10.12 (a) and for a concave
lens in Fig. 10.12 (b).

Observe Fig.10.12 (a) carefully. Several rays of light parallel to the
principal axis are falling on a convex lens. These rays, after refraction
from the lens, are converging to a point on the principal axis. This point
on the principal axis is called the principal focus of the lens. Let us see
now the action of a concave lens.

Observe Fig.10.12 (b) carefully. Several rays of light parallel to the
principal axis are falling on a concave lens. These rays, after refraction
from the lens, are appearing to diverge from a point on the principal
axis. This point on the principal axis is called the principal focus of the
concave lens.

If you pass parallel rays from the opposite surface of the lens, you
get another principal focus on the opposite side. Letter F is usually used
to represent principal focus. However, a lens has two principal foci. They
are represented by F, and F,. The distance of the principal focus from
the optical centre of a lens is called its focal length. The letter f is used to
represent the focal length. How can you find the focal length of a convex
lens? Recall the Activity 10.11. In this Activity, the distance between the
position of the lens and the position of the image of the Sun gives the
approximate focal length of the lens.

Light — Reflection and Refraction

177

Page_Number 177 ended
/n
Page_Number 178 started
10.3.4 Image Formation by Lenses

Lenses form images by refracting light. How do lenses form images?
What is their nature? Let us study this for a convex lens first.

Activity 10.12

Take a convex lens. Find its approximate focal length in a way
described in Activity 10.11.

Draw five parallel straight lines, using chalk, on a long Table such
that the distance between the successive lines is equal to the
focal length of the lens.

Place the lens on a lens stand. Place it on the central line such
that the optical centre of the lens lies just over the line.

The two lines on either side of the lens correspond to F and 2F of
the lens respectively. Mark them with appropriate letters such as
2F,, F,, F, and 2F,, respectively.

Place a burning candle, far beyond 2F, to the left. Obtain a clear
sharp image on a screen on the opposite side of the lens.

Note down the nature, position and relative size of the image.
Repeat this Activity by placing object just behind 2F,, between F,
and 2F, at F,, between F, and O. Note down and tabulate your
observations.

The nature, position and relative size of the image formed by convex
lens for various positions of the object is summarised in Table 10.4.

Table 10.4 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a convex lens for various
positions of the object

Position of the Position of Relative size of Nature of
object the image the image the image

At infinity At focus F, Highly diminished, Real and inverted
point-sized

Beyond 2F, Between F, and 2F, Diminished Real and inverted
At 2F, At 2F, Same size Real and inverted
Between F, and 2F, Beyond 2F, Enlarged Real and inverted
At focus F, At infinity Infinitely large or Real and inverted
highly enlarged

Between focus F, On the same side Enlarged Virtual and erect
and of the lens as the

optical centre O object

Let us now do an Activity to study the nature, position and relative
size of the image formed by a concave lens.

178 Science

Page_Number 178 ended
/n
Page_Number 179 started
Activity 10.13

Take a concave lens. Place it on a lens stand.

Place a burning candle on one side of the lens.

Look through the lens from the other side and observe the image.
Try to get the image on a screen, if possible. If not, observe the
image directly through the lens.

Note down the nature, relative size and approximate position of
the image.

Move the candle away from the lens. Note the change in the size
of the image. What happens to the size of the image when the
candle is placed too far away from the lens.

The summary of the above Activity is given in Table 10.5 below.

Table 10.5 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a concave lens for various

positions of the object

Position of the Position of Relative size of Nature of
object the image the image the image

At infinity At focus F, Highly diminished,
point-sized

Between infinity and Between focus F, Diminished
optical centre O and optical centre O
of the lens

What conclusion can you draw from this Activity? A concave lens
will always give a virtual, erect and diminished image, irrespective of the
position of the object.

10.3.5 Image Formation in Lenses Using Ray Diagrams

We can represent image formation by lenses using ray diagrams. Ray
diagrams will also help us to study the nature, position and relative size
of the image formed by lenses. For drawing ray diagrams in lenses, alike
of spherical mirrors, we consider any two of the following rays -

@) A-ray of light from the object, parallel to the principal axis, after
refraction from a convex lens, passes through the principal focus
on the other side of the lens, as shown in Fig. 10.13 (a). In case of
a concave lens,
the ray appears
to diverge from

Virtual and erect

Virtual and erect

focus located
on the same
side of the lens,
as shown in (@
Fig. 10.13 (b).

f\
the principal LJ)
_

Figure 10.13

Light — Reflection and Refraction

)

179

Page_Number 179 ended
/n
Page_Number 180 started
(ii)

Figure 10.14

(iii)

@ (b)
Figure 10.15

A ray of light passing
through a principal
focus, after refraction
from a convex lens, will
emerge parallel to the
principal axis. This is
shown in Fig. 10.14 (a).
A ray of light appearing
to meet at the principal
focus of a concave lens,
after refraction, will
emerge parallel to the
principal axis. This is
shown in Fig.10.14 (b).
A ray of light passing
through the optical
centre of a lens will
emerge without any
deviation. This is
illustrated in Fig. 10. 15(a)
and Fig. 10.15 (b).

The ray diagrams for the image formation in a convex lens for a few
positions of the object are shown in Fig. 10.16. The ray diagrams
representing the image formation in a concave lens for various positions

of the object are shown in Fig. 10.17.

Science

Page_Number 180 ended
/n
Page_Number 181 started
Figure 10.16 The position, size and the nature of the image formed by
aconvex lens for various positions of the object

(a) (b)

Figure 10.17 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a concave lens

10.3.6 Sign Convention for Spherical Lenses

For lenses, we follow sign conventions, similar to the one used for
spherical mirrors. We apply the rules for signs of distances, except that
all measurements are taken from the optical centre of the lens. According
to the convention, the focal length of a convex lens is positive and that of
a concave lens is negative. You must take care to apply appropriate
signs for the values of u, v, f, object height h and image height h’.

10.3.7 Lens Formula and Magnification

As we have a formula for spherical mirrors, we also have formula for
spherical lenses. This formula gives the relationship between object-
distance (u), image-distance (v) and the focal length (f). The lens formula
is expressed as

Pott (10.8)

The lens formula given above is general and is valid in all situations
for any spherical lens. Take proper care of the signs of different quantities,
while putting numerical values for solving problems relating to lenses.

Light — Reflection and Refraction

181

Page_Number 181 ended
/n
Page_Number 182 started
182

Magnification

The magnification produced by a lens, similar to that for spherical
mirrors, is defined as the ratio of the height of the image and the height
of the object. It is represented by the letter m. If his the height of the
object and h’ is the height of the image given by a lens, then the
magnification produced by the lens is given by,

_ Height of the Image _h’
~ Height of the object A

(10.9)

Magnification produced by a lens is also related to the object-distance
u, and the image-distance v. This relationship is given by

Magnification (m) = W/h=v/u (10.10)
Example 10.3
A concave lens has focal length of 15 em. At what distance should

the object from the lens be placed so that it forms an image at 10 cm
from the lens? Also, find the magnification produced by the lens.

Solution
A concave lens always forms a virtual, erect image on the same side
of the object.
Image-distance v = -10 cm;
Focal length f = -15cm;
Object-distance u = ?
1 1 1

Since 5 F

clr

are

1
or, —
u

1 1 1 1 1

u 10 (15) 10 15

1_-3+2_ 01

u 30 -30
or, u=—30cm
Thus, the object-distance is 30 cm.
Magnification m= v/u

-1
me zl0cm _1_ 4933
-30cm 3

The positive sign shows that the image is erect and virtual. The image
is one-third of the size of the object.

Example 10.4

A2.0 cm tall object is placed perpendicular to the principal axis ofa
convex lens of focal length 10 cm. The distance of the object from the
lens is 15 cm. Find the nature, position and size of the image. Also
find its magnification.

Science

Page_Number 182 ended
/n
Page_Number 183 started
Solution
Height of the object h = + 2.0cm;
Focal length f = + 10cm;
object-distance u -15 cm;

Image-distance v
Height of the image h’ =

toueou
wo

noe Leta
Since | uf

yliia
ew pou f

1 1 1 1 1
= +——=- +
v (-15) 10 15 10

1 -2+3 = 1

vp 30) 30
or, v=+30cm
The positive sign of v shows that the image is formed at a distance of
30 cm on the other side of the optical centre. The image is real and
inverted.

| | A _v
Magnification m= hou
or, h’ = h(v/u)
Height of the image, h’ = (2.0) (+30/-15) =- 4.0 cm
Magnification m= v/u

_+30cm _
-15cem

or, ™ 7

The negative signs of mand h’ show that the image is inverted and
real. It is formed below the principal axis. Thus, a real, inverted image,
4 cm tall, is formed at a distance of 30 cm on the other side of the
lens. The image is two times enlarged.

10.3.8 Power of a Lens

You have already learnt that the ability of a lens to converge or diverge
light rays depends on its focal length. For example, a convex lens of
short focal length bends the light rays through large angles, by focussing
them closer to the optical centre. Similarly, concave lens of very short
focal length causes higher divergence than the one with longer focal
length. The degree of convergence or divergence of light rays achieved
by a lens is expressed in terms of its power. The power of a lens is defined
as the reciprocal of its focal length. It is represented by the letter P. The
power P of a lens of focal length fis given by
1

Paz (10.11)

Light — Reflection and Refraction

183

Page_Number 183 ended
/n
Page_Number 184 started
The SI unit of power ofa lens is ‘dioptre’. It is denoted by the letter D.
If fis expressed in metres, then, power is expressed in dioptres. Thus,
1 dioptre is the power of a lens whose focal length is 1 metre. 1D = 1m".
You may note that the power of a convex lens is positive and that of a
concave lens is negative.

Opticians prescribe corrective lenses indicating their powers. Let us
say the lens prescribed has power equal to + 2.0 D. This means the lens
prescribed is convex. The focal length of the lens is + 0.50 m. Similarly,
a lens of power - 2.5 D has a focal length of - 0.40 m. The lens is concave.

Many optical instruments consist of a number of lenses. They are combined to increase
the magnification and sharpness of the image. The net power (P) of the lenses placed
in contact is given by the algebraic sum of the individual powers P,, P,,, P.,... as
P=P,+P,+ P+...

The use of powers, instead of focal lengths, for lenses is quite convenient for opticians.
During eye-testing, an optician puts several different combinations of corrective lenses

of known power, in contact, inside the testing spectacles’ frame. The optician calculates
the power of the lens required by simple algebraic addition. For example, a combination
of two lenses of power + 2.0 D and + 0.25 D is equivalent to a single lens of power + 2.25 D.
The simple additive property of the powers of lenses can be used to design lens systems
to minimise certain defects in images produced by a single lens. Such a lens system,
consisting of several lenses, in contact, is commonly used in the design of camera
lenses and the objectives of microscopes and telescopes.

More to Know!

Define 1 dioptre of power of a lens.

A convex lens forms a real and inverted image of a needle at a distance
of 50 cm from it. Where is the needle placed in front of the convex lens
if the image is equal to the size of the object? Also, find the power of the
lens.

Find the power of a concave lens of focal length 2 m.

=a Light seems to travel in straight lines.

= Mirrors and lenses form images of objects. Images can be either real or virtual,
depending on the position of the object.

= The reflecting surfaces, of all types, obey the laws of reflection. The refracting
surfaces obey the laws of refraction.

= New Cartesian Sign Conventions are followed for spherical mirrors and lenses.

184 Science

Page_Number 184 ended
/n
Page_Number 185 started
11_1
= Mirror formula, D an “Ff , gives the relationship between the object-distance (u),

image-distance (v), and focal length (/) of a spherical mirror.

= The focal length ofa spherical mirror is equal to half its radius of curvature.

= The magnification produced by a spherical mirror is the ratio of the height of the
image to the height of the object.

= A light ray travelling obliquely from a denser medium to a rarer medium bends
away from the normal. A light ray bends towards the normal when it travels obliquely
from a rarer to a denser medium.

= Light travels in vacuum with an enormous speed of 3x10%ms!. The speed of light
is different in different media.

= The refractive index of a transparent medium is the ratio of the speed of light in
vacuuin to that in the medium.

= Incase of a rectangular glass slab, the refraction takes place at both air-glass
interface and glass-air interface. The emergent ray is parallel to the direction of
incident ray.

1 1.1
Lens formula, Dey gives the relationship between the object-distance (u),

image-distance (v), and the focal length (f) of a spherical lens.

Power of a lens is the reciprocal of its focal length. The SI unit of power of a lens
is dioptre.

1. Which one of the following materials cannot be used to make a lens?
(a) Water (b) Glass (c) Plastic (d) Clay
2. The image formed by a concave mirror is observed to be virtual, erect and larger
than the object. Where should be the position of the object?
(a) Between the principal focus and the centre of curvature
(b) At the centre of curvature
(c) Beyond the centre of curvature
(d) Between the pole of the mirror and its principal focus.

3. Where should an object be placed in front of a convex lens to get a real image of the
size of the object?

(a) At the principal focus of the lens

(b) At twice the focal length

(ce) At infinity

(d) Between the optical centre of the lens and its principal focus.

4. Aspherical mirror and a thin spherical lens have each a focal length of -15em. The
mirror and the lens are likely to be

(a) both concave.
(b) both convex.

Light — Reflection and Refraction 185

Page_Number 185 ended
/n
Page_Number 186 started
(c) the mirror is concave and the lens is convex.
(d) the mirror is convex, but the lens is concave.

No matter how far you stand from a mirror, your image appears erect. The mirror
is likely to be

(a) plane.

(b) concave.

(c) convex.

(d) either plane or convex.

Which of the following lenses would you prefer to use while reading small letters
found in a dictionary?

(a) Aconvex lens of focal length 50 cm.
(b) Aconcave lens of focal length 50 cm.
() Aconvex lens of focal length 5 cm.
(d) Aconcave lens of focal length 5 cm.

We wish to obtain an erect image of an object, using a concave mirror of focal
length 15 cm. What should be the range of distance of the object from the mirror?
What is the nature of the image? Is the image larger or smaller than the object?
Draw a ray diagram to show the image formation in this case.

Name the type of mirror used in the following situations.
(a) Headlights ofa car.

(b) Side/rear-view mirror of a vehicle.

(c) Solar furnace.

Support your answer with reason.

One-half of a convex lens is covered with a black paper. Will this lens produce a
complete image of the object? Verify your answer experimentally. Explain your
observations.

. An object 5 cm in length is held 25 cm away from a converging lens of focal length
10 cm. Draw the ray diagram and find the position, size and the nature of the
image formed.

Aconcave lens of focal length 15 cm forms an image 10 cm from the lens. How far
is the object placed from the lens? Draw the ray diagram.

. An object is placed at a distance of 10 cm from a convex mirror of focal length
15 em. Find the position and nature of the image.

. The magnification produced by a plane mirror is +1. What does this mean?

. An object 5.0 cm in length is placed at a distance of 20 cm in front of a convex
mirror of radius of curvature 30 cm. Find the position of the image, its nature
and size.

. An object of size 7.0 cm is placed at 27 cm in front of a concave mirror of focal
length 18 cm. At what distance from the mirror should a screen be placed, so that
a sharp focussed image can be obtained? Find the size and the nature of the image.

Find the focal length of a lens of power — 2.0 D. What type of lens is this?

. Adoctor has prescribed a corrective lens of power +1.5 D. Find the focal length of
the lens. Is the prescribed lens diverging or converging?

186 Science

Page_Number 186 ended
/n
Page_Number 187 started
CHAPTER ‘| 1
The Human Eye and
the Colourful World

ou have studied in the previous chapter about refraction of light by

lenses. You also studied the nature, position and relative size of
images formed by lenses. How can these ideas help us in the study of
the human eye? The human eye uses light and enables us to see objects
around us. It has a lens in its structure. What is the function of the lens
in a human eye? How do the lenses used in spectacles correct defects of
vision? Let us consider these questions in this chapter.

We have learnt in the previous chapter about light and some of its
properties. In this chapter, we shall use these ideas to study some of the
optical phenomena in nature. We shall also discuss about rainbow
formation, splitting of white light and blue colour of the sky.

11.1 THE HUMAN EYE

The human eye is one of the most valuable and sensitive sense organs.
It enables us to see the wonderful world and the colours around us. On
closing the eyes, we can identify objects to some extent by their smell,
taste, sound they make or by touch. It is, however, impossible to identify
colours while closing the eyes. Thus, of all the sense organs, the human
eye is the most significant one as it enables us to see the beautiful,
colourful world around us.

The human eye is like a camera. Its lens
system forms an image on a light-sensitive =
screen called the retina. Light enters the eye Crystalline lens’
through a thin membrane called the cornea. Aqueous
It forms the transparent bulge on the front
surface of the eyeball as shown in Fig. 11.1. Pupil
The eyeball is approximately sphericalinshape "5
with a diameter of about 2.3 cm. Most of the
refraction for the light rays entering the eye
occurs at the outer surface of the cornea. The
crystalline lens merely provides the finer
adjustment of focal length required to focus
objects at different distances on the retina. We find a structure called iris
behind the cornea. Iris is a dark muscular diaphragm that controls the
size of the pupil. The pupil regulates and controls the amount of light

Ciliary muscles

Retina

} Optic nerve

Vitreous humour

Figure 11.1
The human eye

Page_Number 187 ended
/n
Page_Number 188 started
Do You Know?

188

entering the eye. The eye lens forms an inverted real image of the object
on the retina. The retina is a delicate membrane having enormous
number of light-sensitive cells. The light-sensitive cells get activated
upon illumination and generate electrical signals. These signals are
sent to the brain via the optic nerves. The brain interprets these signals,
and finally, processes the information so that we perceive objects as

they are.

Damage to or malfunction of any part of the visual system can lead to significant loss
of visual functioning. For example, if any of the structures involved in the transmission
of light, like the cornea, pupil, eye lens, aqueous humour and vitreous humour or
those responsible for conversion of light to electrical impulse, like the retina or even
the optic nerve that transmits these impulses to the brain, is damaged, it will result

in visual impairment. You might have experienced that you are not able to see objects
clearly for some time when you enter from bright light to a room with dim light. After
sometime, however, you may be able to see things in the dim-lit room. The pupil of
an eye acts like a variable aperture whose size can be varied with the help of the iris.
When the light is very bright, the iris contracts the pupil to allow less light to enter
the eye. However, in dim light the iris expands the pupil to allow more light to enter
the eye. Thus, the pupil opens completely through the relaxation of the iris.

11.1.1 Power of Accommodation

The eye lens is composed of a fibrous, jelly-like material. Its curvature
can be modified to some extent by the ciliary muscles. The change in the
curvature of the eye lens can thus change its focal length. When the
muscles are relaxed, the lens becomes thin. Thus, its focal length
increases. This enables us to see distant objects clearly. When you are
looking at objects closer to the eye, the ciliary muscles contract. This
increases the curvature of the eye lens. The eye lens then becomes thicker.
Consequently, the focal length of the eye lens decreases. This enables
us to see nearby objects clearly.

The ability of the eye lens to adjust its focal length is called
accommodation. However, the focal length of the eye lens cannot be
decreased below a certain minimum limit. Try to read a printed page
by holding it very close to your eyes. You may see the image being blurred
or feel strain in the eye. To see an object comfortably and distinctly, you
must hold it at about 25 cm from the eyes. The minimum distance, at
which objects can be seen most distinctly without strain, is called the
least distance of distinct vision. It is also called the near point of the eye.
For a young adult with normal vision, the near point is about
25 cm. The farthest point upto which the eye can see objects clearly is
called the far point of the eye. It is infinity for a normal eye. You may
note here a normal eye can see objects clearly that are between 25 cm
and infinity.

Sometimes, the crystalline lens of people at old age becomes milky and
cloudy. This condition is called cataract. This causes partial or complete
loss of vision. It is possible to restore vision through a cataract surgery.

Science

Page_Number 188 ended
/n
Page_Number 189 started
Do You Know?

Why do we have two eyes for vision and not just one?
There are several advantages of our having two eyes instead of one. It gives a wider
field of view. A human being has a horizontal field of view of about 150° with one eye
and of about 180° with two eyes. The ability to detect faint objects is, of course,
enhanced with two detectors instead of one.
Some animals, usually prey animals, have their two eyes positioned on opposite sides

of their heads to give the widest possible field of view. But our two eyes are positioned
on the front of our heads, and it thus reduces our field of view in favour of what is
called stereopsis. Shut one eye and the world looks flat - two-dimensional. Keep both
eyes open and the world takes on the third dimension of depth. Because our eyes
are separated by a few centimetres, each eye sees a slightly different image. Our
brain combines the two images into one, using the extra information to tell us how
close or far away things are.

11.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION

Sometimes, the eye may gradually lose its power of accommodation.
In such conditions, the person cannot see the objects distinctly and
comfortably. The vision becomes blurred due to the refractive defects
of the eye.

There are mainly three common refractive defects of vision. These

are (i) myopia or near-sightedness, (ii) Hypermetropia or far-
sightedness, and (iii) Presbyopia. These defects can be corrected by
the use of suitable spherical lenses. We discuss below these defects
and their correction.

(a) Myopia

The Human Eye and the Colourful World

A person with this defect has the far

This defect can be corrected by pore

back on to the retina and thus the

Myopia is also known as near-sightedness. A person with myopia
can see nearby objects clearly but
cannot see distant objects distinctly.

point nearer than infinity. Such a
person may see clearly upto a
distance of a few metres. In a myopic
eye, the image of a distant object is

(a) Far point of a myopic eye

formed in front of the retina o ~~ oO i
[Fig. 11.2 (b)] and not at the retina a >
itself. This defect may arise due to (b) Myopic Eye

(i) excessive curvature of the eye
lens, or (ii) elongation of the eyeball.

using a concave lens of suitable TTT TS S=SSmlL
power. This is illustrated in
Fig. 11.2 (c). A concave lens of
suitable power will bringthe image —rigure 11.2

(c) Correction for myopia

defect is corrected. concave lens

{a), (b) The myopic eye, and (c) correction for myopia with a

189

Page_Number 189 ended
/n
Page_Number 190 started
(b) Hypermetropia

Hypermetropia is also known as far-sightedness. A
person with hypermetropia can see distant objects
clearly but cannot see nearby objects distinctly. The
near point, for the person, is farther away from the
(a) Near point of a Hypermetropic eye normal near point (25 cm). Such a person has to keep
a reading material much beyond 25 cm from the eye
for comfortable reading. This is because the light rays
from a closeby object are focussed at a point behind
the retina as shown in Fig. 11.3 (b). This defect arises
either because (i) the focal length of the eye lens is too
(b) Hypermetropic eye long, or (ii) the eyeball has become too small. This defect
can be corrected by using a convex lens of appropriate
power. This is illustrated in Fig. 11.3 (c). Eye-glasses
with converging lenses provide the additional focussing
power required for forming the image on the retina.

(c) Correction for Hypermetropic eye (c) Presbyopia
Figure 11.3 The power of accommodation of the eye usually
(a), (b) The hypermetropic eye, and (c) correction decreases with ageing. For most people, the near point
Jor hypermetropia gradually recedes away. They find it difficult to see

nearby objects comfortably and distinctly without
corrective eye-glasses. This defect is called Presbyopia. It arises
due to the gradual weakening of the ciliary muscles and diminishing
flexibility of the eye lens. Sometimes, a person may suffer from
both myopia and hypermetropia. Such people often require bi-
focal lenses. A common type of bi-focal lenses consists of both
concave and convex lenses. The upper portion consists of a concave
lens. It facilitates distant vision. The lower part is a convex lens. It
facilitates near vision.
These days, it is possible to correct the refractive defects with
contact lenses or through surgical interventions.

What is meant by power of accommodation of the eye?

A person with a myopic eye cannot see objects beyond 1.2 m distinctly.
What should be the type of the corrective lens used to restore proper
vision?

What is the far point and near point of the human eye with normal
vision?

A student has difficulty reading the blackboard while sitting in the last
row. What could be the defect the child is suffering from? How can it be
corrected?

190 Science

Page_Number 190 ended
/n
Page_Number 191 started
Think it over
se |

You talk of wondrous things you see,
You say the sun shines bright;
I feel him warm, but how can he
Or make it day or night?

he

— C. CIBBER
Do you know that our eyes can live even after our death? By donating our eyes after we
die, we can light the life of a blind person.
About 35 million people in the developing world are blind and most of them can be
cured. About 4.5 million people with corneal blindness can be cured through corneal
transplantation of donated eyes. Out of these 4.5 million, 60% are children below the
age of 12. So, if we have got the gift of vision, why not pass it on to somebody who does
not have it? What do we have to keep in mind when eyes have to be donated?

Eye donors can belong to any age group or sex. People who use spectacles, or those
operated for cataract, can still donate the eyes. People who are diabetic, have
hypertension, asthma patients and those without communicable diseases can also
donate eyes.

Eyes must be removed within 4-6 hours after death. Inform the nearest eye bank
immediately.

The eye bank team will remove the eyes at the home of the deceased or at a hospital.

Eye removal takes only 10-15 minutes. It is a simple process and does not lead to
any disfigurement.

Persons who were infected with or died because of AIDS, Hepatitis B or C, rabies,
acute leukaemia, tetanus, cholera, meningitis or encephalitis cannot donate eyes.
An eye bank collects, evaluates and distributes the donated eyes. All eyes donated are
evaluated using strict medical standards. Those donated eyes found unsuitable for
transplantation are used for valuable research and medical education. The identities of
both the donor and the recipient remain confidential.
One pair of eyes gives vision to TWO CORNEAL BLIND PEOPLE.

11.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM

You have learnt how light gets refracted through a rectangular glass
slab. For parallel refracting surfaces, as in a glass slab, the emergent ray
is parallel to the incident ray. However, it is slightly displaced laterally.
How would light get refracted through a transparent prism? Consider a
triangular glass prism. It has two triangular bases and three rectangular
lateral surfaces. These surfaces are inclined to each other. The angle
between its two lateral faces is called the angle of the prism. Let us now
do an activity to study the refraction of light through a triangular glass
prism.

The Human Eye and the Colourful World 191

Page_Number 191 ended
/n
Page_Number 192 started
192

Activity 11.1

Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board using drawing pins.
Place a glass prism on it in such a way that it rests on its triangular
base. Trace the outline of the prism using a pencil.

Draw a straight line PE inclined to one of the refracting surfaces,
say AB, of the prism.

Fix two pins, say at points P and Q, on the line PE as shown in
Fig. 11.4.

Look for the images of the pins, fixed at P and Q, through the
other face AC.

Fix two more pins, at points R and S, such that the pins at R and
S and the images of the pins at P and Q lie on the same straight
line.

Remove the pins and the glass prism.

The line PE meets the boundary of the prism at point E
(see Fig. 11.4). Similarly, join and produce the points R and S, Let
these lines meet the boundary of the prism at E and F, respectively.
Join E and F.

Draw perpendiculars to the refracting surfaces AB and AC of the
prism at points E and F, respectively.

Mark the angle of incidence (4i), the angle of refraction (Zr) and
the angle of emergence (Ze) as shown in Fig. 11.4.

PE - Incident ray Zi — Angle of incidence

EF — Refracted ray Zr — Angle of refraction
FS — Emergent ray Ze — Angle of emergence
ZA -— Angle of the prism ZD - Angle of deviation

Figure 11.4 Refraction of light through a triangular glass prism

Here PE is the incident ray, EF is the refracted ray and FS is the
emergent ray. You may note that a ray of light is entering from air to
glass at the first surface AB. The light ray on refraction has bent towards
the normal. At the second surface AC, the light ray has entered from
glass to air. Hence it has bent away from normal. Compare the angle of
incidence and the angle of refraction at each refracting surface of the
prism. Is this similar to the kind of bending that occurs in a glass slab?
The peculiar shape of the prism makes the emergent ray bend at an
angle to the direction of the incident ray. This angle is called the angle of
deviation. In this case ZD is the angle of deviation. Mark the angle of
deviation in the above activity and measure it.

Science

Page_Number 192 ended
/n
Page_Number 193 started
11.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GLASS PRISM

You must have seen and appreciated the spectacular colours in a rainbow.
How could the white light of the Sun give us various colours of the
rainbow? Before we take up this question, we shall first go back to the
refraction of light through a prism. The inclined refracting surfaces of a
glass prism show exciting phenomenon. Let us find it out through an
activity.

Activity 11.2

Take a thick sheet of cardboard and make a small hole or narrow
slit in its middle.

Allow sunlight to fall on the narrow slit. This gives a narrow beam
of white light.

Now, take a glass prism and allow the light from the slit to fall on
one of its faces as shown in Fig, 11.5.

Turn the prism slowly until the light that comes out of it appears
on a nearby screen

What do you observe? You will find a beautiful band of colours.
Why does this happen?

The prism has probably split the incident
white light into a band of colours. Note the
colours that appear at the two ends of the
colour band. What is the sequence of colours
that you see on the screen? The various
colours seen are Violet, Indigo, Blue, Green,
Yellow, Orange and Red, as shown in
Fig. 11.5. The acronym VIBGYOR will help Waite light
you to remember the sequence of colours. can

The band of the coloured components of a Glass prism

~

te y
ig
tragett R

Deg

light beam is called its spectrum. You might Figure 11.5 Dispersion of white light by the glass prism

not be able to see all the colours separately.
Yet something makes each colour distinct from the other. The splitting
of light into its component colours is called dispersion.

You have seen that white light is dispersed into its seven-colour
components by a prism. Why do we get these colours? Different colours
of light bend through different angles with respect to the incident ray,
as they pass through a prism. The red light bends the least while the
violet the most. Thus the rays of each colour emerge along different
paths and thus become distinct. It is the band of distinct colours that
we see in a spectrum.

Isaac Newton was the first to use a glass
prism to obtain the spectrum of sunlight. He
tried to split the colours of the spectrum of
white light further by using another similar
prism. However, he could not get any more
colours. He then placed a second identical
prism in an inverted position with respect to

White light

Screen

the first prism, as shown in Fig. 11.6. This Figure 11.6 Recombination of the spectrum of white light

The Human Eye and the Colourful World

193

Page_Number 193 ended
/n
Page_Number 194 started
Figure 11.7
Rainbow in the sky

Raindrop

allowed all the colours of the spectrum to pass through the
second prism. He found a beam of white light emerging from the
other side of the second prism. This observation gave Newton
the idea that the sunlight is made up of seven colours.

Any light that gives a spectrum similar to that of sunlight is
often referred to as white light.

Arainbow is a natural spectrum appearing in the sky after a
rain shower (Fig. 11.7). It is caused by dispersion of sunlight by
tiny water droplets, present in the atmosphere. A rainbow is
always formed in a direction opposite to that of the Sun. The
water droplets act like small prisms. They refract and disperse
the incident sunlight, then reflect it internally, and finally refract
it again when it comes out of the raindrop (Fig. 11.8). Due to the
dispersion of light and internal reflection, different colours reach
the observer's eye.

You can also see a rainbow on a sunny day when you look at
the sky through a waterfall or through a water fountain, with the
Sun behind you.

11.5 ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION

You might have observed the apparent random wavering or

flickering of objects seen through a turbulent stream of hot air rising

above a fire or a radiator. The air just above the fire becomes hotter than
the air further up. The hotter air is lighter (less dense) than the cooler air
above it, and has a refractive index slightly less than that of the cooler
air. Since the physical conditions of the refracting medium (air) are not
stationary, the apparent position of the object, as seen through the hot
air, fluctuates. This wavering is thus an effect of atmospheric refraction
(refraction of light by the earth’s atmosphere) on a small scale in our
local environment. The twinkling of stars is a similar phenomenon ona
much larger scale. Let us see how we can explain it.

Figure 11.8
Rainbow formation
Apparent
Star *, star position

Ray path

J,
Refractive index i
increasing
UJ
«
Figure 11.9

Apparent star position
due to atmospheric
refraction

194

Twinkling of stars

The twinkling of a star is due to atmospheric refraction of
starlight. The starlight, on entering the earth’s atmosphere,
undergoes refraction continuously before it reaches the earth.
The atmospheric refraction occurs in a medium of gradually
changing refractive index. Since the atmosphere bends
starlight towards the normal, the apparent position of the
star is slightly different from its actual position. The star
appears slightly higher (above) than its actual position when
viewed near the horizon (Fig. 11.9). Further, this apparent
position of the star is not stationary, but keeps on changing
slightly, since the physical conditions of the earth's
atmosphere are not stationary, as was the case in the
previous paragraph. Since the stars are very distant, they
approximate point-sized sources of light. As the path of rays
of light coming from the star goes on varying slightly, the
apparent position of the star fluctuates and the amount of

Science

Page_Number 194 ended
/n
Page_Number 195 started
starlight entering the eye flickers — the star sometimes appears brighter,
and at some other time, fainter, which is the twinkling effect.

Why don't the planets twinkle? The planets are much closer to the
earth, and are thus seen as extended sources. If we consider a planet as
a collection of a large number of point-sized sources of light, the total
variation in the amount of light entering our eye from all the individual
point-sized sources will average out to zero, thereby
nullifying the twinkling effect.

Advance sunrise and delayed sunset
The Sun is visible to us about 2 minutes before the
actual sunrise, and about 2 minutes after the actual Observer neat

sunrise, we mean the actual crossing of the horizon by d

Apparent position fi
of the Sun cord ik

sunset because of atmospheric refraction. By actual i ees ____ Horizon

the Sun. Fig. 11.10 shows the actual and apparent ‘
positions of the Sun with respect to the horizon. The ‘
time difference between actual sunset and the apparent
sunset is about 2 minutes. The apparent flattening of
the Sun's disc at sunrise and sunset is also due to the ae

same phenomenon. Atmosphere

11.6 SCATTERING OF LIGHT

The interplay of light with objects around us gives rise to several
spectacular phenomena in nature. The blue colour of the sky, colour of
water in deep sea, the reddening of the sun at sunrise and the sunset
are some of the wonderful phenomena we are familiar with. In the previous
class, you have learnt about the scattering of light by colloidal particles.
The path of a beam of light passing through a true solution is not visible.
However, its path becomes visible through a colloidal solution where the
size of the particles is relatively larger.

11.6.1 Tyndall Effect

The earth’s atmosphere is a heterogeneous mixture of minute particles.
These particles include smoke, tiny water droplets, suspended particles
of dust and molecules of air. When a beam of light strikes such fine
particles, the path of the beam becomes visible. The light reaches us,
after being reflected diffusely by these particles. The phenomenon of
scattering of light by the colloidal particles gives rise to Tyndall effect
which you have studied in Class IX. This phenomenon is seen when a
fine beam of sunlight enters a smoke-filled room through a small hole.
Thus, scattering of light makes the particles visible. Tyndall effect can
also be observed when sunlight passes through a canopy of a dense
forest. Here, tiny water droplets in the mist scatter light.

The colour of the scattered light depends on the size of the
scattering particles. Very fine particles scatter mainly blue light while
particles of larger size scatter light of longer wavelengths. If the size
of the scattering particles is large enough, then, the scattered light may
even appear white.

The Human Eye and the Colourful World

Figure 11.10
Atmospheric refraction
effects at sunrise and
sunset

195

Page_Number 195 ended
/n
Page_Number 196 started
11.6.2 Why is the colour of the clear Sky Blue?

The molecules of air and other fine particles in the atmosphere have size
smaller than the wavelength of visible light. These are more effective in
scattering light of shorter wavelengths at the blue end than light of longer
wavelengths at the red end. The red light has a wavelength about 1.8
times greater than blue light. Thus, when sunlight passes through the
atmosphere, the fine particles in air scatter the blue colour (shorter
wavelengths) more strongly than red. The scattered blue light enters
our eyes. If the earth had no atmosphere, there would not have been
any scattering. Then, the sky would have looked dark. The sky appears
dark to passengers flying at very high altitudes, as scattering is not
prominent at such heights.

You might have observed that ‘danger’ signal lights are red in colour.
Do you know why? The red is least scattered by fog or smoke. Therefore,
it can be seen in the same colour at a distance.

11.6.3 Colour of the Sun at Sunrise and Sunset

Have you seen the sky and the Sun at sunset or sunrise? Have you
wondered as to why the Sun and the surrounding sky appear red? Let
us do an activity to understand the blue colour of the sky and the reddish
appearance of the Sun at the sunrise or sunset.

Activity 11.3

Place a strong source (S) of white light at the focus of a converging
lens (L,). This lens provides a parallel beam of light.

Allow the light beam to pass through a transparent glass tank (T)
containing clear water.

Allow the beam of light to pass through a circular hole (c) made in
a cardboard. Obtain a sharp image of the circular hole on a screen
(MN) using a second converging lens (L). as shown in Fig. 11.11.
Dissolve about 200 g of sodium thiosulphate (hypo) in about 2 L of
clean water taken in the tank. Add about 1 to 2 mL of concentrated
sulphuric acid to the water. What do you observe?

You will find fine microscopic sulphur particles precipitating in about
2 to3 minutes. As the sulphur particles begin to form, you can observe
the blue light from the three sides
of the glass tank. This is due to
scattering of short wavelengths by
minute colloidal sulphur

Figure 11.11

particles. Observe the colour of
the transmitted light from the
fourth side of the glass tank facing
the circular hole. It is interesting
to observe at first the orange red
colour and then bright crimson

An arrangement for observing scattering of light in colloidal solution red colour on the screen.

196

Science

Page_Number 196 ended
/n
Page_Number 197 started
wy,

This activity demonstrates the scattering of XK sun nearly
light that helps you to understand the bluish Sek overhead
colour of the sky and the reddish appearance of
the Sun at the sunrise or the sunset. Blue scattered away Less bl

Light from the Sun near the horizon passes Sun appears reddish scattered
through thicker layers of air and larger distance vl on
in the earth’s atmosphere before reaching oureyes — sun near mS

(Fig. 11.12). horizon
However, light from the Sun overhead would

travel relatively shorter distance. At noon, the Sun /

appears white as only a little of the blue andviolet Figure 11.12

colours are scattered. Near the horizon, most of — Reddening of the Sun at sunrise and sunset

the blue light and shorter wavelengths are

scattered away by the particles. Therefore, the light that reaches our

eyes is of longer wavelengths. This gives rise to the reddish appearance

of the Sun.

The ability of the eye to focus both near and distant objects, by adjusting its focal
length, is called the accommodation of the eye.

The smallest distance, at which the eye can see objects clearly without strain, is
called the near point of the eye or the least distance of distinct vision. For a young
adult with normal vision, it is about 25 cm.

The common refractive defects of vision include myopia, hypermetropia and
presbyopia. Myopia (short-sightedness — the image of distant objects is focussed
before the retina) is corrected by using a concave lens of suitable power.
Hypermetropia (far-sightedness — the image of nearby objects is focussed beyond

the retina) is corrected by using a convex lens of suitable power. The eye loses its
power of accommodation at old age.

The splitting of white light into its component colours is called dispersion.

Scattering of light causes the blue colour of sky and the reddening of the Sun at
sunrise and sunset.

1. The human eye can focus objects at different distances by adjusting the focal
length of the eye lens. This is due to

(a) presbyopia.

(b) accommodation.
(c) near-sightedness.
(d) far-sightedness.

The Human Eye and the Colourful World 197

Page_Number 197 ended
/n
Page_Number 198 started
The human eye forms the image of an object at its
(a) cornea. (b) iris. (c) pupil. (d) retina.
The least distance of distinct vision for a young adult with normal vision is about
(a) 25m. (b) 2.5 cm. (c) 25 cm. (d) 2.5m.
The change in focal length of an eye lens is caused by the action of the
(a) pupil. (b) retina.
(c) ciliary muscles. (d) iris.
. A person needs a lens of power -5.5 dioptres for correcting his distant vision. For

correcting his near vision he needs a lens of power +1.5 dioptre. What is the focal
length of the lens required for correcting (i) distant vision, and (ii) near vision?
The far point of a myopic person is 80 cm in front of the eye. What is the nature and
power of the lens required to correct the problem?

Make a diagram to show how hypermetropia is corrected. The near point of a
hypermetropic eye is 1 m. What is the power of the lens required to correct this
defect? Assume that the near point of the normal eye is 25 cm.

Why is a normal eye not able to see clearly the objects placed closer than
25 cm?

What happens to the image distance in the eye when we increase the distance of an
object from the eye?

. Why do stars twinkle?

. Explain why the planets do not twinkle.

. Why does the Sun appear reddish early in the morning?

. Why does the sky appear dark instead of blue to an astronaut?

198 Science

Page_Number 198 ended
/n
Page_Number 199 started
CHAPTER 1 2
Electricity

GQ

HHH

xd

lectricity has an important place in modern society. It is a controllable

and convenient form of energy for a variety of uses in homes, schools,
hospitals, industries and so on. What constitutes electricity? How does
it flow in an electric circuit? What are the factors that control or regulate
the current through an electric circuit? In this Chapter, we shall attempt
to answer such questions. We shall also discuss the heating effect of
electric current and its applications.

12.1 ELECTRIC CURRENT AND CIRCUIT

We are familiar with air current and water current. We know that flowing
water constitute water current in rivers. Similarly, if the electric charge
flows through a conductor (for example, through a metallic wire), we
say that there is an electric current in the conductor. In a torch, we
know that the cells (or a battery, when placed in proper order) provide
flow of charges or an electric current through the torch bulb to glow. We
have also seen that the torch gives light only when its switch is on. What
does a switch do? A switch makes a conducting link between the cell and
the bulb. A continuous and closed path of an electric current is called an
electric circuit. Now, if the circuit is broken anywhere (or the switch of the
torch is turned off), the current stops flowing and the bulb does not glow.

How do we express electric current? Electric current is expressed by
the amount of charge flowing through a particular area in unit time. In
other words, it is the rate of flow of electric charges. In circuits using
metallic wires, electrons constitute the flow of charges. However, electrons
were not known at the time when the phenomenon of electricity was first
observed. So, electric current was considered to be the flow of positive
charges and the direction of flow of positive charges was taken to be the
direction of electric current. Conventionally, in an electric circuit the
direction of electric current is taken as opposite to the direction of the
flow of electrons, which are negative charges.

Page_Number 199 ended
/n
Page_Number 200 started
Ifa net charge Q, flows across any cross-section of a conductor in

time (, then the current J, through the cross-section is
T= 2 (12.1)

t

The SI unit of electric charge is coulomb (C), which is equivalent
to the charge contained in nearly 6 x 101° electrons. (We know that
an electron possesses a negative charge of 1.6 x 107'°C.) The electric
current is expressed by a unit called ampere (A), named after the
French scientist, Andre-Marie Ampere (1775-1836). One ampere is
constituted by the flow of one coulomb of charge per second, that
is, 1 A= 1 C/1 s. Small quantities of current are expressed in
milliampere (1 mA= 10° A) or in microampere
(1 wA = 10° A). An instrument called ammeter

measures electric current in a circuit. It is always

connected in series in a circuit through which
+ the current is to be measured. Figure 12.1 shows
the schematic diagram of a typical electric circuit
comprising a cell, an electric bulb, an ammeter
and a plug key. Note that the electric current
flows in the circuit from the positive terminal of

HE

Figure 12.1

) the cell to the negative terminal of the cell through
the bulb and ammeter.

A schematic diagram of an electric circuit
comprising — cell, electric bulb, ammeter and

plug key

Example 12.1

A current of 0.5 Ais drawn by a filament of an electric bulb for 10
minutes. Find the amount of electric charge that flows through the
circuit.

Solution

We are given, I= 0.5 A; {= 10 min = 600 s.
From Eq. (12.1), we have

Q =f

0.5Ax 600s

300 C

QUES TION §S

What does an electric circuit mean?

Define the unit of current.

Calculate the number of electrons constituting one coulomb of charge.

200

Science

Page_Number 200 ended
/n
Page_Number 201 started
‘Flow’ of charges inside a wire

How does a metal conduct electricity? You would think that a low-energy electron
would have great difficulty passing through a solid conductor. Inside the solid, the
atoms are packed together with very little spacing between them. But it turns out
that the electrons are able to ‘travel’ through a perfect solid crystal smoothly and
easily, almost as if they were in a vacuum. The ‘motion’ of electrons in a conductor,
however, is very different from that of charges in empty space. When a steady current
flows through a conductor, the electrons in it move with a certain average ‘drift speed’.
One can calculate this drift speed of electrons for a typical copper wire carrying a
small current, and it is found to be actually very small, of the order of 1 mm s"'. How
is it then that an electric bulb lights up as soon as we turn the switch on? It cannot be
that a current starts only when an electron from one terminal of the electric supply
physically reaches the other terminal through the bulb, because the physical drift of
electrons in the conducting wires is a very slow process. The exact mechanism of the
current flow, which takes place with a speed close to the speed of light, is fascinating,
but it is beyond the scope of this book. Do you feel like probing this question at an
advanced level?

More to Know!

12.2 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL AND POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE

What makes the electric charge to flow? Let us consider the analogy of
flow of water. Charges do not flow in a copper wire by themselves, just as
water in a perfectly horizontal tube does not flow. If one end of the tube
is connected to a tank of water kept at a higher level, such that there isa
pressure difference between the two ends of the tube, water flows out of
the other end of the tube. For flow of charges in a conducting metallic
wire, the gravity, of course, has no role to play; the electrons move only
if there is a difference of electric pressure — called the potential difference -
along the conductor. This difference of potential may be produced by a
battery, consisting of one or more electric cells. The chemical action within
a cell generates the potential difference across the terminals of the cell,
even when no current is drawn from it. When the cell is connected to a
conducting circuit element, the potential difference sets the charges in
motion in the conductor and produces an electric current. In order to
maintain the current in a given electric circuit, the cell has to expend its
chemical energy stored in it.

We define the electric potential difference between two points in an
electric circuit carrying some current as the work done to move a unit
charge from one point to the other —

Potential difference (V) between two points = Work done (W)/Charge (Q)

V = W/Q (12.2)

The SI unit of electric potential difference is volt (V), named after
Alessandro Volta (1745-1827), an Italian physicist. One volt is the

Electricity 201

Page_Number 201 ended
/n
Page_Number 202 started
potential difference between two points in a current carrying conductor
when 1 joule of work is done to move a charge of 1 coulomb from one
point to the other.

1 joule

1 coulomb (12.3)

Therefore, | volt =

1V =1JC!

The potential difference is measured by means of an instrument called
the voltmeter. The voltmeter is always connected in parallel across the
points between which the potential difference is to be measured.

Example 12.2
How much work is done in moving a charge of 2 C across two points
having a potential difference 12 V?

Solution

The amount of charge Q, that flows between two points at potential
difference V (= 12 V) is 2 C. Thus, the amount of work W. done in
moving the charge [from Eq. (12.2)] is

Ww = vO
12Vx2C
24 J.

QUESTIONS

Name a device that helps to maintain a potential difference across a
conductor.

What is meant by saying that the potential difference between two points
is 1 V?

How much energy is given to each coulomb of charge passing through a
6 V battery?

12.3 CIRCUIT DIAGRAM

We know that an electric circuit, as shown in Fig. 12.1, comprises a cell
(or a battery), a plug key, electrical component(s), and connecting wires.
It is often convenient to draw a schematic diagram, in which different
components of the circuit are represented by the symbols conveniently
used. Conventional symbols used to represent some of the most
commonly used electrical components are given in Table 12.1.

202 Science

Page_Number 202 ended
/n
Page_Number 203 started
Table 12.1 Symbols of some commonly used components in circuit diagrams

ES eee _

1 An electric cell — FE
2 A battery or a combination of cells —| I I a

3 Plug key or switch (open) —( ee
4 Plug key or switch (closed) —({e)—

5 A wire joint

t

6 Wires crossing without joining

7 Electric bulb Qo
8 A resistor of resistance R —MA\/)\/h/N——

9 Variable resistance or rheostat wk or | R

10 Ammeter

11 Voltmeter

12.4 OHM’'S LAW

Is there a relationship between the potential difference across a conductor
and the current through it? Let us explore with an Activity.

Activity 12.1

= Set up a circuit as shown in Fig. 12.2, consisting of a nichrome wire XY of length, say 0.5
m, an ammeter, a voltmeter and four cells of 1.5 V each. (Nichrome is an alloy of nickel,
chromium, manganese, and iron metals.)

Electricity 203

Page_Number 203 ended
/n
Page_Number 204 started
First use only one cell as the source in the
circuit. Note the reading in the ammeter I,
for the current and reading of the voltmeter
V for the potential difference across the
nichrome wire XY in the circuit. Tabulate
them in the Table given.

Next connect two cells in the circuit and
note the respective readings of the ammeter
and voltmeter for the values of current
through the nichrome wire and potential
difference across the nichrome wire.
Repeat the above steps using three cells
and then four cells in the circuit separately.

Calculate the ratio of V to I for each pair of Figure 12.2 Electric circuit for studying Ohm's law

potential difference V and current I.

Number of cells | Current through | Potential difference V/I
used in the the nichrome across the (volt/ampere)

circuit

wire, I nichrome
(ampere) wire, V (volt)

Plot a graph between V and J, and observe the nature of the graph.

2.0

Tos} Lo
= vol YS
@ 1.

= os} vA

g FT J

§ 0.4f /

& tL

L L L L L L
001 02 03 04 05 06
Current (A) ——>

Figure 12.3

V-I graph for a nichrome wire. A
straight line plot shows that as the
current through a wire increases, the
potential difference across the wire
increases linearly — this is Ohm's law.

204

In this Activity, you will find that approximately the
same value for V/I is obtained in each case. Thus the V-I
graph is a straight line that passes through the origin of
the graph, as shown in Fig. 12.3. Thus, V/Jis a constant
ratio.

In 1827, a German physicist Georg Simon Ohm
(1787-1854) found out the relationship between the current
I, flowing in a metallic wire and the potential difference across
its terminals. He stated that the electric current flowing
through a metallic wire is directly proportional to the
potential difference V, across its ends provided its
temperature remains the same. This is called Ohm’s law. In
other words —

Vol (12.4)
or V/I = constant
= R
or Vv = JR (12.5)

In Eq. (12.4), Ris aconstant for the given metallic wire
at a given temperature and is called its resistance. It is the
property of a conductor to resist the flow of charges

Science

Page_Number 204 ended
/n
Page_Number 205 started
through it. Its SI unit is ohm, represented by the Greek letter Q. According
to Ohim’s law,
R=V/I (12.6)
If the potential difference across the two ends of a conductor is 1 V
and the current through it is 1 A, then the resistance R, of the conductor

; ; 1 volt
is 1 Q. That is, 1 ohm = Tampere ampere

Also from Eq. (12.5) we get

I=V/R (12.7)

It is obvious from Eq. (12.7) that the current through a resistor is
inversely proportional to its resistance. If the resistance is doubled the
current gets halved. In many practical cases it is necessary to increase
or decrease the current in an electric circuit. A component used to
regulate current without changing the voltage source is called variable
resistance. In an electric circuit, a device called rheostat is often used to
change the resistance in the circuit. We will now study about electrical
resistance of a conductor with the help of following Activity.

Activity 12.2

Take a nichrome wire, a torch bulb, a 10 W bulb and an ammeter (0 - 5 A range), a plug

key and some connecting wires.

Set up the circuit by connecting four dry cells of 1.5 V each in series with the ammeter

leaving a gap XY in the circuit, as shown in Fig. 12.4.

yo

I Nichrome wire

HHH

Figure 12.4

10 W bulb

¥

=

Torch bulb

Complete the circuit by connecting the nichrome wire in the gap XY. Plug the key. Note
down the ammeter reading. Take out the key from the plug. [Note: Always take out the key

Jrom the plug afier measuring the current through the circuit.]

Replace the nichrome wire with the torch bulb in the circuit and find the current through

it by measuring the reading of the ammeter.
Now repeat the above step with the 10 W bulb in the gap XY.

Are the ammeter readings differ for different components connected in the gap XY? What

do the above observations indicate?

You may repeat this Activity by keeping any material component in the gap. Observe the

ammeter readings in each case. Analyse the observations.

In this Activity we observe that the current is different for different
components. Why do they differ? Certain components offer an easy path
for the flow of electric current while the others resist the flow. We know

Electricity

205

Page_Number 205 ended
/n
Page_Number 206 started
Activity 12.3

that motion of electrons in an electric circuit constitutes an electric
current. The electrons, however, are not completely free to move within a
conductor. They are restrained by the attraction of the atoms among
which they move. Thus, motion of electrons through a conductor is
retarded by its resistance. A component of a given size that offers a low
resistance is a good conductor. A conductor having some appreciable
resistance is called a resistor. A component of identical size that offers a
higher resistance is a poor conductor. An insulator of the same size offers
even higher resistance.

12.5 FACTORS ON WHICH THE RESISTANCE OF A
CONDUCTOR DEPENDS

Complete an electric circuit consisting of a cell, an ammeter, a nichrome wire of length |
[say, marked (1)] and a plug key, as shown in Fig. 12.5.

=| ls Os

Figure 12.5 Electric circuit to study the factors on which the resistance of conducting wires depends

Now, plug the key. Note the current in the ammeter.

Replace the nichrome wire by another nichrome wire of same thickness but twice the
length, that is 21 [marked (2) in the Fig. 12.5].

Note the ammeter reading.

Now replace the wire by a thicker nichrome wire, of the same length I [marked (3)]. A
thicker wire has a larger cross-sectional area. Again note down the current through the

circuit.

Instead of taking a nichrome wire, connect a copper wire [marked (4) in Fig. 12.5] in the
circuit. Let the wire be of the same length and same area of cross-section as that of the
first nichrome wire [marked (1)]. Note the value of the current.

Notice the difference in the current in all cases.

Does the current depend on the length of the conductor?

Does the current depend on the area of cross-section of the wire used?

206

It is observed that the ammeter reading decreases to one-half when
the length of the wire is doubled. The ammeter reading is increased when
a thicker wire of the same material and of the same length is used in the
circuit. A change in ammeter reading is observed when a wire of different
material of the same length and the same area of cross-section is used.
On applying Ohm's law [Eqs. (12.5) - (12.7)], we observe that the

Science

Page_Number 206 ended
/n
Page_Number 207 started
resistance of the conductor depends (i) on its length, (ii) on its area of

cross-section, and (iii) on the nature of its material. Precise measurements

have shown that resistance of a uniform metallic conductor is directly

proportional to its length (J) and inversely proportional to the area of
cross-section (A). That is,

Rel (12.8)

and R«1/A (12.9)

Combining Eqs. (12.8) and (12.9) we get

ret
i

I ,
or, R=97 (12.10)

where p (rho) is a constant of proportionality and is called the electrical
resistivity of the material of the conductor. The SI unit of resistivity is
Q m. It is a characteristic property of the material. The metals and alloys
have very low resistivity in the range of 10° Qm to 10° Q m. They are
good conductors of electricity. Insulators like rubber and glass have
resistivity of the order of 10!” to 10!7 Q m. Both the resistance and
resistivity of a material vary with temperature.

Table 12.2 reveals that the resistivity of an alloy is generally higher
than that of its constituent metals. Alloys do not oxidise (burn) readily
at high temperatures. For this reason, they are commonly used in
electrical heating devices, like electric iron, toasters etc. Tungsten is used
almost exclusively for filaments of electric bulbs, whereas copper and
aluminium are generally used for electrical transmission lines.

Table 12.2 Electrical resistivity* of some substances at 20°C

Conductors Silver 1.60 x 10°
Copper 1.62 x 10°
Aluminium 2.63 x 10%
Tungsten 5.20 x 10%
Nickel 6.84 x 10%
Iron 10.0 x 10%
Chromium 12.9 x 10%
Mercury 94,0 x 10%
Manganese 1.84 x 10°

Alloys Constantan 49 x 10°
(alloy of Cu and Ni)
Manganin 44 x 10°
(alloy of Cu, Mn and Ni)
Nichrome 100 x 10°
(alloy of Ni, Cr, Mn and Fe)

Insulators Glass 10!°— 104
Hard rubber 1038 — 1916
Ebonite 10!5— 1017
Diamond 10” - 108
Paper (dry) 10%

* You need not memorise these values. You can use these values for solving numerical
problems.

Electricity

207

Page_Number 207 ended
/n
Page_Number 208 started
208

Example 12.3

(a) How much current will an electric bulb draw from a 220 V source,
if the resistance of the bulb filament is 1200 Q? (b) How much
current will an electric heater coil draw from a 220 V source, if
the resistance of the heater coil is 100 Q?

Solution
(a) We are given V= 220 V; R= 1200 Q.

From Eq. (12.6), we have the current I= 220 V/1200 2 =0.18 A.
(b) We are given, V= 220 V, R= 100Q.

From Eq. (12.6), we have the current J= 220 V/100 Q=2.2 A.
Note the difference of current drawn by an electric bulb and electric
heater from the same 220 V source!

Example 12.4

The potential difference between the terminals of an electric heater is
60 V when it draws a current of 4 A from the source. What current
will the heater draw ifthe potential difference is increased to 120 V?

Solution

We are given, potential difference V= 60 V, current [= 4 A.
V60V

According to Ohin’s law, R = T= a4a7 15 Q,

When the potential difference is increased to 120 V the current is
given by

pM _ 120v
current = > = 75

The current through the heater becomes 8 A.

=8A,

Example 12.5

Resistance of a metal wire of length 1 mis 26 Q at 20°C. Ifthe diameter
of the wire is 0.3 mm, what will be the resistivity of the metal at that
temperature? Using Table 12.2, predict the material of the wire.

Solution

We are given the resistance R of the wire = 26 Q, the diameter
d=0.3 mm = 3 x 10% m, and the length lof the wire = 1 m.
Therefore, from Eq. (12.10), the resistivity of the given metallic wire is
p = (RA/) = (Rad?/4))

Substitution of values in this gives

p= 1.84x10%Qm

The resistivity of the metal at 20°C is 1.84 x 10° Q m. From
Table 12.2, we see that this is the resistivity of manganese.

Example 12.6
A4Q resistance wire is doubled on it. Calculate the new resistance
of the wire.

Science

Page_Number 208 ended
/n
Page_Number 209 started
Solution

We are given, R=4Q.

When a wire is doubled on it, its length would become half and
area of cross-section would double. That is, a wire of length land
area of cross-section A becomes of length 1/2 and area of cross-
section 2A. From Eq. (12.10), we have

l
R=p—
P A
2
Rr, -p )
(A)
where R, is the new resistance.
Rip l2,,t ll
Therefore, R =p oa Pama
R_ 4Q
R, =—=— =19.
or, =a

The new resistance of the wire is 1 Q.

QUESTIONS

On what factors does the resistance of a conductor depend?

Will current flow more easily through a thick wire or a thin wire of the
same material, when connected to the same source? Why?

Let the resistance of an electrical component remains constant while
the potential difference across the two ends of the component decreases
to half of its former value. What change will occur in the current through
it?

Why are coils of electric toasters and electric irons made of an alloy
rather than a pure metal?

Use the data in Table 12.2 to answer the following —
(a) Which among iron and mercury is a better conductor?

(b) Which material is the best conductor?

12.6 RESISTANCE OF A SYSTEM OF RESISTORS

In preceding sections, we learnt about some simple electric circuits. We
have noticed how the current through a conductor depends upon its
resistance and the potential difference across its ends. In various electrical
gadgets, we often use resistors in various combinations. We now therefore
intend to see how Ohm’s law can be applied to combinations of resistors.

There are two methods of joining the resistors together. Figure 12.6
shows an electric circuit in which three resistors having resistances R 7
R, and R,, respectively, are joined end to end. Here the resistors are said
to be connected in series.

Electricity 209

Page_Number 209 ended
/n
Page_Number 210 started
210

HHH-——

Figure 12.6 Resistors in series

Figure 12.7 shows a combination of resistors in which three resistors
are connected together between points X and Y. Here, the resistors are
said to be connected in parallel.

R,

HH H-——-<(),

Figure 12.7 Resistors in parallel

12.6.1 Resistors in Series

What happens to the value of current when a number of resistors are
connected in series in a circuit? What would be their equivalent
resistance? Let us try to understand these with the help of the following
activities.

Activity 12.4

Join three resistors of different values in series. Connect them
with a battery, an ammeter and a plug key, as shown in Fig. 12.6.
You may use the resistors of values like 1 Q, 2 Q, 3 Q etc., anda
battery of 6 V for performing this Activity.

Plug the key. Note the ammeter reading.

Change the position of ammeter to anywhere in between the
resistors. Note the ammeter reading each time.

Do you find any change in the value of current through the
ammeter?

Science

Page_Number 210 ended
/n
Page_Number 211 started
You will observe that the value of the current in the ammeter is the
same, independent ofits position in the electric circuit. It means that in
a series combination of resistors the current is the same in every part of
the circuit or the same current through each resistor.

Activity 12.5

In Activity 12.4, insert a voltmeter across the ends X and Y of the
series combination of three resistors, as shown in Fig. 12.8.
Plug the key in the circuit and note the voltmeter reading. It
gives the potential difference across the series combination of
resistors. Let it be V. Now measure the potential difference across
the two terminals of the battery. Compare the two values.

Take out the plug key and disconnect the voltmeter. Now insert
the voltmeter across the ends X and P of the first resistor, as
shown in Fig. 12.8.

{HHH -——t

Figure 12.8

Plug the key and measure the potential difference across the first
resistor. Let it be V,.

Similarly, measure the potential difference across the other two
resistors, separately. Let these values be V, and V,, respectively.
Deduce a relationship between V, V,, V, and V,.

You will observe that the potential difference Vis equal to the sum of
potential differences V,, Va and V,. That is the total potential difference
across a combination of resistors in series is equal to the sum of potential
difference across the individual resistors. That is,

V=V,+V, +V, (12.1)

In the electric circuit shown in Fig. 12.8, let Ibe the current through
the circuit. The current through each resistor is also I. It is possible to
replace the three resistors joined in series by an equivalent single resistor
of resistance R, such that the potential difference V across it, and the
current Ithrough the circuit remains the same. Applying the Ohm’s law
to the entire circuit, we have

V=IR (12.12)

Electricity

211

Page_Number 211 ended
/n
Page_Number 212 started
On applying Ohm’s law to the three resistors separately, we further

have
V, = IR, [12.13(a]]
Vv, = IR, [12.13(b)]
and V, = IR, [12.13(c)]

From Eq. (12.11),
IR=IR,+1R,+1R,
or
R, =R, +R, +R, (12.14)

We can conclude that when several resistors are joined in series, the
resistance of the combination R, equals the sum of their individual
resistances, R,, R,, R,, and is thus greater than any individual resistance.

Example 12.7

An electric lamp, whose resistance is 20 Q, and a conductor of 4 Q
resistance are connected to a 6 V battery (Fig. 12.9). Calculate (a) the
total resistance of the circuit, (b) the current through the circuit, and
(c) the potential difference across the electric lamp and conductor.

42

In

HHH >)

Figure 12.9 An electric lamp connected in series with
a resistor of 4Q toa6V battery

Solution

The resistance of electric lamp, R,= 20 Q,

The resistance of the conductor connected in series, R,=4 Q.
Then the total resistance in the circuit

R =R,+R,

R, = 200+49=240.

The total potential difference across the two terminals of the battery
V=6V.

Now by Ohm’s law, the current through the circuit is given by
I = V/R,

6V/249

0.25 A.

Science

Page_Number 212 ended
/n
Page_Number 213 started
Applying Ohm’s law to the electric lamp and conductor separately,
we get potential difference across the electric lamp,

V, = 202x0.25A
= 5V;
and,
that across the conductor, V, = 4Q2x0.25A
= lv.

Suppose that we like to replace the series combination of electric
lamp and conductor by a single and equivalent resistor. Its resistance
must be such that a potential difference of 6 V across the battery
terminals will cause a current of 0.25 A in the circuit. The resistance
Rof this equivalent resistor would be

R =V/I

6V/0.25A

= 240.

This is the total resistance of the series circuit; it is equal to the sum
of the two resistances.

Q U ES TION S

Draw a schematic diagram of a circuit consisting of a battery of three
cells of 2 V each, a 5 Q resistor, an 8 Q resistor, and a 12 Q resistor, and
a plug key, all connected in series.

Redraw the circuit of Question 1, putting in an ammeter to measure
the current through the resistors and a voltmeter to measure the
potential difference across the 12 Q resistor. What would be the readings
in the ammeter and the voltmeter?

12.6.2 Resistors in Parallel

Now, let us consider the arrangement of three resistors joined in parallel
with a combination of cells (or a battery), as shown in Fig. 12.7.

Activity 12.6

Make a parallel combination, XY, of three
resistors having resistances R,, R,, and R,,
respectively. Connect it with a battery, a
plug key and an ammeter, as shown in
Fig. 12.10. Also connect a voltmeter in
parallel with the combination of resistors.

Plug the key and note the ammeter reading.
Let the current be I. Also take the voltmeter 1
reading. It gives the potential difference V,
across the combination. The potential
difference across each resistor is also V. This
can be checked by connecting the voltmeter

- K
HHH+——¢

across each individual resistor (see .
Fig. 12.11). Figure 12.10

Electricity 213

Page_Number 213 ended
/n
Page_Number 214 started
214

Take out the plug from the key. Remove the ammeter and voltmeter from the circuit.
Insert the ammeter in series with the resistor R,, as shown in Fig. 12.11. Note the ammeter
reading, I,.

Figure 12.11

Similarly, measure the currents through R, and R,. Let these be J, and I,, respectively.
What is the relationship between J, I, f, and L?

It is observed that the total current J, is equal to the sum of the
separate currents through each branch of the combination.

I=L +141, (12.15,

Let R, be the equivalent resistance of the parallel combination of
resistors. By applying Ohm’s law to the parallel combination of resistors,

we have
I=V/R, (12.16
On applying Ohm's law to each resistor, we have
IL=V/R,; 1,=V/R, and1,=V/R, (12.17,

From Eqs. (12.15) to (12.17), we have
V/R, = V/R, + V/R, + V/R,
or

1/R, = 1/R, +1/R, +1/R, (12.18

Thus, we may conclude that the reciprocal of the equivalent resistance
of a group of resistances joined in parallel is equal to the sum of the
reciprocals of the individual resistances.

Example 12.8

In the circuit diagram given in Fig. 12.10, suppose the resistors R,,
R, and R, have the values 5 Q, 10 Q, 30 Q, respectively, which have
been connected to a battery of 12 V. Calculate (a) the current through
each resistor, (b) the total current in the circuit, and (c) the total circuit
resistance.

Solution
R,=5Q, R,= 10 Q, and R, = 30 Q.
Potential difference across the battery, V= 12 V.
This is also the potential difference across each of the individual
resistor; therefore, to calculate the current in the resistors, we use
Ohms law.
The current I, through R,= V/R,
I= 12V/5Q = 2.4A,

Science

Page_Number 214 ended
/n
Page_Number 215 started
The current J,, throughR, = V/R,
I,=12V/10Q= 1L2A.
The current [,, through R, = V/R,
I, = 12 V/30Q = O.4A.

The total current in the circuit,
I= 1,+1,+1,
(2.4+12+04A
=4A

The total resistance R, is given by [Eq. (12.18)]

1 11 1 1
a a
R, 5 10 30 3
Thus, R, =3Q.

Example 12.9

Ifin Fig. 12.12, R, = 10Q, R,=40Q, R,=30, R, =20Q, R, =60Q,
and a 12 V battery is connected to the arrangement. Calculate
(a) the total resistance in the circuit, and (b) the total current flowing
in the circuit.

Solution
Suppose we replace the parallel resistors R, and R, by an
equivalent resistor of resistance, R’” Similarly we replace
the parallel resistors R,, R, and R, by an equivalent single
resistor of resistance R” Then using Eq. (12.18), we have
1/ R’=1/10+1/40 = 5/40; thatis R’ =8Q.
Similarly, 1/R” = 1/30+ 1/20+ 1/60 = 6/60;

that is, R’ = 10 Q.
Thus, the total resistance, R= R’+ R’= 18 Q.
To calculate the current, we use Ohm’s law, and get
T=V/R=12V/18 Q = 0.67 A.

We have seen that in a series circuit the current is constant
throughout the electric circuit. Thus it is obviously impracticable to
connect an electric bulb and an electric heater in series, because they
need currents of widely different values to operate properly (see Example
12.3). Another major disadvantage of a series circuit is that when one
component fails the circuit is broken and none of the components works.
If you have used ‘fairy lights’ to decorate buildings on festivals, on
marriage celebrations etc., you might have seen the electrician spending
lot of time in trouble-locating and replacing the ‘dead’ bulb - each has
to be tested to find which has fused or gone. On the other hand, a parallel
circuit divides the current through the electrical gadgets. The total
resistance in a parallel circuit is decreased as per Eq. (12.18). This is
helpful particularly when each gadget has different resistance and
requires different current to operate properly.

Electricity

Figure 12.12

An electric circuit showing
the combination of series
and parallel resistors

215

Page_Number 215 ended
/n
Page_Number 216 started
QUESTIONS

Judge the equivalent stance when the following are connected in
parallel - (a) 1 Q@ and 10° Q, (b) 1 Q and 10° Q, and 10% Q.

An electric lamp of 100 Q, a toaster of resistance 50 Q, and a water filter
of resistance 500 Q are connected in parallel to a 220 V source. What is
the r tance of an electric iron connected to the same source that
takes as much current as all three appliances, and what is the current
through it?

What are the advantages of connecting electrical devices in parallel
with the battery instead of connecting them in series?

How can three resistors of resistances 2 Q, 3 Q, and 6 Q be connected to
give a total resistance of (a) 4 Q, (b) 1 Q?

What is (a) the highest, (b) the lowest total resistance that can be secured
by combinations of four coils of resistance 4 Q, 8 Q, 12 Q, 24 Q?

12.7 HEATING EFFECT OF ELECTRIC CURRENT

We know that a battery or a cell is a source of electrical energy. The
chemical reaction within the cell generates the potential difference between
its two terminals that sets the electrons in motion to flow the current
through a resistor or a system of resistors connected to the battery. We
have also seen, in Section 12.2, that to maintain the current, the source
has to keep expending its energy. Where does this energy go? A part of
the source energy in maintaining the current may be consumed into
useful work (like in rotating the blades of an electric fan). Rest of the
source energy may be expended in heat to raise the temperature of
gadget. We often observe this in our everyday life. For example, an electric
fan becomes warm if used continuously for longer time etc. On the other
hand, ifthe electric circuit is purely resistive, that is, a configuration of
resistors only connected to a battery; the source energy continually gets
dissipated entirely in the form of heat. This is known as the heating
effect of electric current. This effect is utilised in devices such as electric
heater, electric iron etc.

Consider a current I flowing through a resistor of resistance R. Let
the potential difference across it be V (Fig. 12.13). Let tbe the time during
which a charge @Q flows across. The work done in moving the charge Q
through a potential difference Vis VQ. Therefore, the source must supply
energy equal to VQ in time t. Hence the power input to the circuit by the
source is

pevev1 (12.19)

Or the energy supplied to the circuit by the source in time tis Px t,
that is, VIt. What happens to this energy expended by the source? This
energy gets dissipated in the resistor as heat. Thus for a steady
current J, the amount of heat H produced in time tis

H=VIt (12.20)

216 Science

Page_Number 216 ended
/n
Page_Number 217 started
Applying Ohm’s law [Eq. (12.5)], we get

H=F Rt (12.21)

This is known as Joule’s law of heating. The
law implies that heat produced in a resistor is
(i) directly proportional to the square of current
for a given resistance, (ii) directly proportional to
resistance for a given current, and (iii) directly 1
proportional to the time for which the current flows
through the resistor. In practical situations, when
an electric appliance is connected to a known

K +
voltage source, Eq. (12.21) is used after {+} |

calculating the current through it, using the Figure 12.13

relation I= V/R. A steady current in a purely resistive electric circuit

Example 12.10

An electric iron consumes energy at a rate of 840 W when heating is
at the maximum rate and 360 W when the heating is at the minimum.
The voltage is 220 V. What are the current and the resistance in each
case?

Solution

From Eq. (12.19), we know that the power input is

P=VI

Thus the current I= P/V

(a) When heating is at the maximum rate,
I= 840 W/220 V = 3.82 A;
and the resistance of the electric iron is
R=V/I= 220 V/3.82 A= 57.60 Q.

(b) When heating is at the minimum rate,
1=360 W/220 V=1.64A:
and the resistance of the electric iron is
R=V/I= 220 V/1.64 A= 134.15 Q.

Example 12.11
100 J of heat are produced each second in a 4 Q resistance. Find the
potential difference across the resistor.

Solution
H=100J,R=4Q0,t=1s, V=?
From Eq. (12.21) we have the current through the resistor as
I = \(H/RO
V[100 J/(4.Q x 1 s)]
= SA
Thus the potential difference across the resistor, V[from Eq. (12.5)] is
V = JR
5AX4Q
20 V.

Electricity 217

Page_Number 217 ended
/n
Page_Number 218 started
QUESTIONS

Why does the cord of an electric heater not glow while the heating element

218

does?

Compute the heat generated while transferring 96000 coulomb of charge
in one hour through a potential difference of 50 V.

An electric iron of resistance 20 Q takes a current of 5 A. Calculate the
heat developed in 30 s.

12.7.1 Practical Applications of Heating Effect of
Electric Current

The generation of heat in a conductor is an inevitable consequence of
electric current. In many cases, it is undesirable as it converts useful
electrical energy into heat. In electric circuits, the unavoidable heating
can increase the temperature of the components and alter their properties.
However, heating effect of electric current has many useful applications.
The electric laundry iron, electric toaster, electric oven, electric kettle and
electric heater are some of the familiar devices based on Joule’s heating.

The electric heating is also used to produce light, as in an electric
bulb. Here, the filament must retain as much of the heat generated as is
possible, so that it gets very hot and emits light. It must not melt at such
high temperature. A strong metal with high melting point such as
tungsten (melting point 3380°C) is used for making bulb filaments. The
filament should be thermally isolated as much as possible, using
insulating support, etc. The bulbs are usually filled with chemically
inactive nitrogen and argon gases to prolong the life of filament. Most of
the power consumed by the filament appears as heat, but a small part
of it is in the form of light radiated.

Another common application of Joule’s heating is the fuse used in
electric circuits. It protects circuits and appliances by stopping the flow
of any unduly high electric current. The fuse is placed in series with the
device. It consists of a piece of wire made of a metal or an alloy of
appropriate melting point, for example aluminium, copper, iron, lead
etc. Ifa current larger than the specified value flows through the circuit,
the temperature of the fuse wire increases. This melts the fuse wire and
breaks the circuit. The fuse wire is usually encased in a cartridge of
porcelain or similar material with metal ends. The fuses used for domestic
purposes are rated as 1A, 2A, 3A,5A, 10A, etc. For an electric iron
which consumes 1 kW electric power when operated at 220 V, a current
of (1000/220) A, that is, 4.54 A will flow in the circuit. In this case, a5A
fuse must be used.

Science

Page_Number 218 ended
/n
Page_Number 219 started
12.8 ELECTRIC POWER

You have studied in your earlier Class that the rate of doing work is
power. This is also the rate of consumption of energy.

Equation (12.21) gives the rate at which electric energy is dissipated
or consumed in an electric circuit. This is also termed as electric power.

The power Pis given by
P= VI
Or P= PR=V°/R (12.22)

The SI unit of electric power is watt (W). It is the power consumed by
a device that carries 1 Aof current when operated at a potential difference
of 1 V. Thus,
1W = lvoltx lampere=1VA (12.23)
The unit ‘watt’ is very small. Therefore, in actual practice we use a
much larger unit called ‘kilowatt’. It is equal to 1000 watts. Since electrical
energy is the product of power and time, the unit of electric energy is,
therefore, watt hour (Wh). One watt hour is the energy consumed when
1 watt of power is used for 1 hour. The commercial unit of electric energy
is kilowatt hour (kW h), commonly known as ‘unit’.
1kWh = 1000 watt x 3600 second
= 3.6x 10° watt second
= 3.6x 10° joule (J)

that we use.

Many people think that electrons are consumed in an electric circuit. This is wrong!

We pay the electricity board or electric company to provide energy to move electrons
through the electric gadgets like electric bulb, fan and engines. We pay for the energy

More to Know!

Example 12.12
An electric bulb is connected to a 220 V generator. The current is
0.50 A. What is the power of the bulb?

Solution

P = VI
= 220Vx0.50A
= 110Jd/s
= 110W.

Example 12.13

An electric refrigerator rated 400 W operates 8 hour/day. What is
the cost of the energy to operate it for 30 days at Rs 3.00 per kW h?

Electricity

219

Page_Number 219 ended
/n
Page_Number 220 started
Solution
The total energy consumed by the refrigerator in 30 days would be
400 W x 8.0 hour/day x 30 days = 96000 W h

=96 kWh

Thus the cost of energy to operate the refrigerator for 30 days is
96 kW h x Rs 3.00 per kW h = Rs 288.00

Q U ES TION $

220

What determines the rate at which energy is delivered by a current?

An electric motor takes 5 A from a 220 V line. Determine the power of
the motor and the energy consumed in 2 h.

Astream of electrons moving through a conductor constitutes an electric current.
Conventionally, the direction of current is taken opposite to the direction of flow of
electrons.

The SI unit of electric current is ampere.

To set the electrons in motion in an electric circuit, we use a cell or a battery. A cell
generates a potential difference across its terminals. It is measured in volts (V).
Resistance is a property that resists the flow of electrons in a conductor. It controls
the magnitude of the current. The SI unit of resistance is ohm (Q).

Ohm’s law: The potential difference across the ends of a resistor is directly
proportional to the current through it, provided its temperature remains the same.
The resistance of a conductor depends directly on its length, inversely on its area of
cross-section, and also on the material of the conductor.

The equivalent resistance of several resistors in series is equal to the sum of their
individual resistances.

Aset of resistors connected in parallel has an equivalent resistance R, given by
11

R, R

The electrical energy dissipated in a resistor is given by
W=VXxIxt

The unit of power is watt (W). One watt of power is consumed when 1 A of current
flows at a potential difference of 1 V.

The commercial unit of electrical energy is kilowatt hour (kWh).
1kWh =38,600,000 J = 3.6 x 10°J.

Science

Page_Number 220 ended
/n
Page_Number 221 started
10.
11.

12.

13.

14,

Electricity

A piece of wire of resistance R is cut into five equal parts. These parts are then
connected in parallel. If the equivalent resistance of this combination is R’, then the
ratio R/R’is —

(a) 1/25 (b) 1/5 (9) 5 (d) 25
Which of the following terms does not represent electrical power in a circuit?
(a) PR (b) IR? (c) VI (d) V’/R

An electric bulb is rated 220 V and 100 W. When it is operated on 110 V, the
power consumed will be -—

(a) 100 W (b) 75 W (c) 50 W (d) 25 W

Two conducting wires of the same material and of equal lengths and equal diameters
are first connected in series and then parallel in a circuit across the same potential
difference. The ratio of heat produced in series and parallel combinations would be —
(a) 1:2 (b) 2:1 (c) 1:4 (d) 4:1

How is a voltmeter connected in the circuit to measure the potential difference
between two points?

A copper wire has diameter 0.5 mm and resistivity of 1.6 x 10° Q m. What will be
the length of this wire to make its resistance 10 Q? How much does the resistance
change if the diameter is doubled?

The values of current J flowing in a given resistor for the corresponding values of
potential difference V across the resistor are given below —

I(amperes) 0.5 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0

V (volts) 1.6 3.4 6.7 10.2 13.2

Plot a graph between Vand I and calculate the resistance of that resistor.

When a 12 V battery is connected across an unknown resistor, there is a current of
2.5 mA in the circuit. Find the value of the resistance of the resistor.

A battery of 9 V is connected in series with resistors of 0.2 Q, 0.3 Q,0.402,0.50
and 12 Q, respectively. How much current would flow through the 12 © resistor?
How many 176 Q resistors (in parallel) are required to carry 5 A on a 220 V line?
Show how you would connect three resistors, each of resistance 6 Q, so that the
combination has a resistance of (i) 9 Q, (ii) 4Q.

Several electric bulbs designed to be used on a 220 V electric supply line, are rated
10 W. How many lamps can be connected in parallel with each other across the two
wires of 220 V line if the maximum allowable current is 5 A?

Ahot plate of an electric oven connected to a 220 V line has two resistance coils A
and B, each of 24 Q resistance, which may be used separately, in series, or in
parallel. What are the currents in the three cases?

Compare the power used in the 2 Q resistor in each of the following circuits:
() a6 V battery in series with 1 Q and 2 © resistors, and (ii) a 4 V battery in parallel
with 12 Q and 2 @ resistors.

221

Page_Number 221 ended
/n
Page_Number 222 started
. Two lamps, one rated 100 W at 220 V, and the other 60 W at 220 V, are connected
in parallel to electric mains supply. What current is drawn from the line if the supply
voltage is 220 V?

. Which uses more energy, a 250 W TV set in 1 hr, or a 1200 W toaster in 10 minutes?

. An electric heater of resistance 8 Q draws 15 A from the service mains 2 hours.
Calculate the rate at which heat is developed in the heater.

. Explain the following.
(a) Why is the tungsten used almost exclusively for filament of electric lamps?

(b) Why are the conductors of electric heating devices, such as bread-toasters
and electric irons, made of an alloy rather than a pure metal?

(c) Why is the series arrangement not used for domestic circuits?
How does the resistance of a wire vary with its area of cross-section?

(ec) Why are copper and aluminium wires usually employed for electricity
transmission?

222 Science

Page_Number 222 ended
/n
Page_Number 223 started
CHAPTER 1 3

Magnetic Effects of
Electric Current

c the previous Chapter on ‘Electricity’ we learnt about the heating
effects of electric current. What could be the other effects of electric
current? We know that an electric current-carrying wire behaves like a
magnet. Let us perform the following Activity to reinforce it.

Activity 13.1 K R

= Take a straight thick copper wire and
place it between the points X and Y in an
electric circuit, as shown in Fig. 13.1. L

= Place a small compass near to this copper af
wire. See the position of its needle.

= Pass the current through the circuit by AHHHe ly
inserting the key into the plug.
= Observe the change in the position of the Figure 13.1
compass needle. Compass needle ts deflected on passing an electric

current through a metallic conductor

We see that the needle is deflected. What does it mean? It means that
the electric current through the copper wire has produced a magnetic
effect. Thus we can say that electricity and magnetism are linked to each
other. Then, what about the reverse possibility of an electric effect of
moving magnets? In this Chapter we will study magnetic fields and such
electromagnetic effects. We shall also study about electromagnets and
electric motors which involve the magnetic effect of electric current, and
electric generators which involve the electric effect of moving magnets.

Hans Christian Oersted (1777-1851)

Hans Christian Oersted, one of the leading scientists of the 19”
century, played a crucial role in understanding electromagnetism.
In 1820 he accidentally discovered that a compass needle got deflected
when an electric current passed through a metallic wire placed nearby.
Through this observation Oersted showed that electricity and
magnetism were related phenomena. His research later created
technologies such as the radio, television and fiber optics. The unit of
magnetic field strength is named the Oersted in his honor.


Page_Number 223 ended
/n
Page_Number 224 started
13.1 MAGNETIC FIELD AND FIELD LINES

We are familiar with the fact that a compass needle gets deflected when
brought near a bar magnet. A compass needle is, in fact, a small bar
magnet. The ends of the compass needle point approximately towards
north and south directions. The end pointing towards north is called north
seeking or north pole. The other end that points towards south is called
south seeking or south pole. Through various activities we have observed
that like poles repel, while unlike poles of magnets attract each other.

Q UES TION

Why does a compass needle get deflected when brought near
a bar magnet?

Activity 13.2

Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing
board using some adhesive material.
Place a bar magnet in the centre of it.
Sprinkle some iron filings uniformly
around the bar magnet (Fig. 13.2). A
salt-sprinkler may be used for this
purpose.

Now tap the board gently.

Figure 13.2
What d b: ?
© You CDServe fron filings near the bar magnet align

themselves along the field lines.

The iron filings arrange themselves in a pattern as shown
Fig. 13.2. Why do the iron filings arrange in such a pattern? What does
this pattern demonstrate? The magnet exerts its influence in the region
surrounding it. Therefore the iron filings experience a force. The force
thus exerted makes iron filings to arrange in a pattern. The region
surrounding a magnet, in which the force of the magnet can be detected,
is said to have a magnetic field. The lines along which the iron filings
align themselves represent magnetic field lines.

Are there other ways of obtaining magnetic field lines around a bar
magnet? Yes, you can yourself draw the field lines of a bar magnet.

Activity 13.3

Take a small compass and a bar magnet.

Place the magnet on a sheet of white paper fixed on a drawing
board, using some adhesive material.

Mark the boundary of the magnet.

Place the compass near the north pole of the magnet. How does
it behave? The south pole of the needle points towards the north
pole of the magnet. The north pole of the compass is directed
away from the north pole of the magnet.

4 Science

Page_Number 224 ended
/n
Page_Number 225 started
Mark the position of two ends of the needle.
Now move the needle to a new position

such that its south pole occupies the 4
position previously occupied by its north s
pole. x

In this way, proceed step by step till you N {ssi s

reach the south pole of the magnet as
shown in Fig. 13.3.

Figure 13.3
Join the points marked on the paper by a g
smooth curve. This curve represents compass needle
a field line.

Repeat the above procedure and draw as
many lines as you can. You will get a
pattern shown in Fig. 13.4. These lines
represent the magnetic field around the
magnet. These are known as magnetic
field lines.

Observe the deflection in the compass
needle as you move it along a field line.
The deflection increases as the needle is
moved towards the poles.

Figure 13.4

Drawing a magnetic field line with the help ofa

Field lines around a bar magnet

Magnetic field is a quantity that has both direction and magnitude.
The direction of the magnetic field is taken to be the direction in whicha
north pole of the compass needle moves inside it. Therefore it is taken
by convention that the field lines emerge from north pole and merge at
the south pole (note the arrows marked on the field lines in Fig. 13.4).
Inside the magnet. the direction of field lines is from its south pole to its
north pole. Thus the magnetic field lines are closed curves.

The relative strength of the magnetic field is shown by the degree of
closeness of the field lines. The field is stronger, that is, the force acting
on the pole of another magnet placed is greater where the field lines are
crowded (see Fig. 13.4).

No two field-lines are found to cross each other. If they did, it would
mean that at the point of intersection, the compass needle would point
towards two directions, which is not possible.

13.2 MAGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A CURRENT-CARRYING
CONDUCTOR

In Activity 13.1, we have seen that an electric current through a
metallic conductor produces a magnetic field around it. In order to
Jind the direction of the field produced let us repeat the activity in the
following way —

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current

Page_Number 225 ended
/n
Page_Number 226 started
Activity 13.4

Take a long straight copper wire, two or three cells of 1.5 V each, and a plug key. Connect
all of them in series as shown in Fig. 13.5 (a).

Place the straight wire parallel to and over a compass needle.

Plug the key in the circuit.

Observe the direction of deflection of the north pole of the needle. If the current flows from
north to south, as shown in Fig. 13.5 (a), the north pole of the compass needle would move
towards the east.

Replace the cell connections in the circuit as shown in Fig. 13.5 (b). This would result in
the change of the direction of current through the copper wire, that is, from south to
north.

Observe the change in the direction of deflection of the needle. You will see that now the
needle moves in opposite direction, that is, towards the west [Fig. 13.5 (b)]. It means that
the direction of magnetic field produced by the electric current is also reversed.

N
x
North W

\ zat ©

HH
@) @)

Figure 13.5 A simple electric circuit in which a straight copper wire ts placed parallel to and over a compass
needle. The deflection in the needle becomes opposite when the atrection of the current is reversed.

13.2.1 Magnetic Field due to a Current through a Straight
Conductor

What determines the pattern of the magnetic field generated by a current
through a conductor? Does the pattern depend on the shape of the
conductor? We shall investigate this with an activity.

We shall first consider the pattern of the magnetic field around a
straight conductor carrying current.

Activity 13.5

Take a battery (12 V), a variable resistance (or a rheostat), an
ammeter (0-5 A), a plug key, and a long straight thick copper
wire.

Insert the thick wire through the centre, normal to the plane of a
rectangular cardboard. Take care that the cardboard is fixed and
does not slide up or down.

Science

Page_Number 226 ended
/n
Page_Number 227 started
Variable
Connect the copper wire vertically between the resistance
points X and Y, as shown in Fig. 13.6 (a), in
series with the battery, a plug and key.
Sprinkle some iron filings uniformly on the
cardboard. (You may use a salt sprinkler for this
purpose.)
Keep the variable of the rheostat at a fixed
position and note the current through the
ammeter.
Close the key so that a current flows through
the wire. Ensure that the copper wire placed
between the points X and Y remains vertically
straight.
Gently tap the cardboard a few times. Observe
the pattern of the iron filings. You would find
that the iron filings align themselves showing
a pattern of concentric circles around the
copper wire (Fig. 13.6).
What do these concentric circles represent?
They represent the magnetic field lines.
How can the direction of the magnetic field be
found? Place a compass at a point (say P) over
a circle. Observe the direction of the needle. The
direction of the north pole of the compass
needle would give the direction of the field lines
produced by the electric current through the
straight wire at point P. Show the direction by
an arrow.
Does the direction of magnetic field lines get
reversed if the direction of current through the
straight copper wire is reversed? Check it.

Figure 13.6

(a) A pattern of concentric circles indicating
the field lines of a magnetic field around a
straight conducting wire. The arrows in the
circles show the direction of the field lines.
(b) A close up of the pattern obtained.

What happens to the deflection of the compass needle placed at a
given point if the current in the copper wire is changed? To see this, vary
the current in the wire. We find that the deflection in the needle also
changes. In fact, if the current is increased, the deflection also increases.
It indicates that the magnitude of the magnetic field produced at a given
point increases as the current through the wire increases.

What happens to the deflection of the needle if the compass is moved
Jrom the copper wire but the current through the wire remains the same?
To see this, now place the compass at a farther point from the conducting
wire (say at point Q). What change do you observe? We see that the
deflection in the needle decreases. Thus the magnetic field produced by
a given current in the conductor decreases as the distance from it
increases. From Fig. 13.6, it can be noticed that the concentric circles
representing the magnetic field around a current-carrying straight wire
become larger and larger as we move away from it.

13.2.2 Right-Hand Thumb Rule

A convenient way of finding the direction of magnetic field associated
with a current-carrying conductor is —

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current

Page_Number 227 ended
/n
Page_Number 228 started
Imagine that you are holding a current-carrying straight
conductor in your right hand such that the thumb points towards
the direction of current. Then your fingers will wrap around the

Magnetic, conductor in the direction of the field lines of the magnetic field, as

Meld shown in Fig. 13.7. This is known as the right-hand thumb rule*.
Current Example 13.1

Figure 13.7 A current through a horizontal power line flows in east to west

Right-hand thumb rule direction. What is the direction of magnetic field at a point directly

below it and at a point directly above it?

Solution

The current is in the east-west direction. Applying the right-hand
thumb rule, we get that the direction of magnetic field at a point
below the wire is from north to south. The direction of magnetic field
at a point directly above the wire is from south to north.

QUES TION S§

Draw magnetic field lines around a bar magnet.
List the properties of magnetic lines of force.

Why don’t two magnetic lines of force intersect each other?

13.2.3 Magnetic Field due to a Current through a
Circular Loop

We have so far observed the pattern of the magnetic field lines
produced around a current-carrying straight wire. Suppose
this straight wire is bent in the form of a circular loop and a
current is passed through it. How would the magnetic field
lines look like? We know that the magnetic field produced
s by acurrent-carrying straight wire depends inversely on the
distance from it. Similarly at every point of a current-carrying
circular loop, the concentric circles representing the magnetic
field around it would become larger and larger as we move
away from the wire (Fig. 13.8). By the time we reach at the
centre of the circular loop, the arcs of these big circles would
Figure 13.8 appear as straight lines. Every point on the wire carrying
Magnetic field lines of the field current would give rise to the magnetic field appearing as
produced by a current-carrying straight lines at the center of the loop. By applying the right
circular loop hand rule, it is easy to check that every section of the wire
contributes to the magnetic field lines in the same direction
within the loop.

* This rule is also called Maxwell's corkscrew rule. [f we consider ourselves drivirig a
corkscrew in the direction of the current, then the direction of the corkscrew ts the
direction of the magnetic fiela.

Science

Page_Number 228 ended
/n
Page_Number 229 started
We know that the magnetic field produced by a current-carrying
wire at a given point depends directly on the current passing through it.
Therefore, if there is a circular coil having n turns, the field produced is
n times as large as that produced by a single turn. This is because the
current in each circular turn has the same direction, and the field due to

each turn then just adds up.

Activity 13.6

Take a rectangular cardboard having two holes.
Insert a circular coil having large number of turns
through them, normal to the plane of the cardboard.
Connect the ends of the coil in series with a battery,
a key and a rheostat, as shown in Fig. 13.9.
Sprinkle iron filings uniformly on the cardboard.
Plug the key.

Tap the cardboard gently a few times. Note the
pattern of the iron filings that emerges on the
cardboard.

Figure 13.9
Magnetic field produced by a current-

carrying circular cotl.

13.2.4 Magnetic Field due to a Current in a Solenoid

A coil of many circular turns of insulated copper wire wrapped
closely in the shape of a cylinder is called a solenoid. The pattern
of the magnetic field lines around a current-carrying solenoid is
shown in Fig. 13.10, Compare the pattern of the field with the
magnetic field around a bar magnet (Fig. 13.4). Do they look
similar? Yes, they are similar. In fact, one end of the solenoid
behaves as a magnetic north pole, while the other behaves as the
south pole. The field lines inside the solenoid are in the form of
parallel straight lines. This indicates that the magnetic field is
the same at all points inside the solenoid. That is, the field is
uniform inside the solenoid.

A strong magnetic field produced inside a solenoid can be
used to magnetise a piece of magnetic material, like soft iron,
when placed inside the coil (Fig. 13.11). The magnet so formed is
called an electromagnet.

QU ES TION S

1. Consider a circular loop of wire lying in
the plane of the table. Let the current
pass through the loop clockwise. Apply
the right-hand rule to find out the
direction of the magnetic field inside
and outside the loop.

2. The magnetic field in a given region is
uniform. Draw a diagram to represent it.

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current

Figure 13.10

Field lines of the magnetic field
through and around a current
carrying solenoid.

+ K
[' -—@)
Figure 13.11

A current-carrying solenoid cot
ts used to magnetise steel rod
inside it - an electromagnet.

Page_Number 229 ended
/n
Page_Number 230 started
3. Choose the correct option.
The magnetic field inside a long straight solenoid-carrying current
(a) is zero.
(b) decreases as we move towards its end.

(c) increases as we move towards its end.

(d) is the same at all points.

13.3 FORCE ON A CURRENT-CARRYING CONDUCTOR
IN A MAGNETIC FIELD

We have learnt that an electric current flowing through a conductor
produces a magnetic field. The field so produced exerts a force on a
magnet placed in the vicinity of the conductor. French scientist Andre
Marie Ampere (1775-1836) suggested that the magnet must also exert
an equal and opposite force on the current-carrying conductor. The force
due to a magnetic field acting on a current-carrying conductor can be
demonstrated through the following activity.

Activity 13.7

Take a small aluminium rod AB (of about 5 cm). Using
two connecting wires suspend it horizontally from a
stand, as shown in Fig. 13.12.

Place a strong horse-shoe magnet in such a way that
the rod lies between the two poles with the magnetic
field directed upwards. For this put the north pole of
the magnet vertically below and south pole vertically
above the aluminium rod (Fig. 13.12).

Connect the aluminium rod in series with a battery,
a key and a rheostat.

Now pass a current through the aluminium rod from
end B to end A.

What do you observe? It is observed that the rod is
displaced towards the left. You will notice that the rod
gets displaced.

Reverse the direction of current flowing through the

rod and observe the direction of its displacement. It is Figure 13.12 - ;

now towards the right. A current-carrying rod, AB, experiences

Why does the rod get displaced? a force perpendicular to its length and
the magnetic field.

The displacement of the rod in the above activity suggests that a
Jorce is exerted on the current-carrying aluminium rod when it is placed
in a magnetic field. It also suggests that the direction of force is also
reversed when the direction of current through the conductor is reversed.
Now change the direction of field to vertically downwards by
interchanging the two poles of the magnet. It is once again observed that

Science

Page_Number 230 ended
/n
Page_Number 231 started
the direction of force acting on the current-carrying rod gets reversed. It
shows that the direction of the force on the conductor depends upon the
direction of current and the direction of the magnetic field. Experiments
have shown that the displacement of the rod is largest (or the magnitude
of the force is the highest) when the direction of current is at right angles
to the direction of the magnetic field. In such a condition we can use a
simple rule to find the direction of the force on the conductor.

In Activity 13.7, we considered the
direction of the current and that of the magnetic
Jjield perpendicular to each other and found
that the force is perpendicular to both of them.
The three directions can be illustrated through
a simple rule, called Fleming’s left-hand rule.
According to this rule, stretch the thumb,
Jorefinger and middle finger of your left hand
such that they are mutually perpendicular
(Fig. 13.13). If the first finger points in the
direction of magnetic field and the second
Jinger in the direction of current, then the
thumb will point in the direction of motion or
the force acting on the conductor.

Devices that use current-carrying conductors and magnetic fields
include electric motor, electric generator, loudspeakers, microphones
and measuring instruments. In the next few sections we shall study
about electric motors and generators.

Field

Thumb - Motion Current

Force

Current

Figure 13.13
Fleming's left-hand rule

Example 13.2
Anelectron enters a magnetic field at right angles to it, as shown

in Fig. 13.14. The direction of force acting on the electron will be

(a) to the right.

(b) — to the left. Electron
(c) out of the page. Figure 13.14
(da) into the page.

Magnetic field

Solution

Answer is option (d). The direction of force is perpendicular to the
direction of magnetic field and current as given by Fleming’s left hand
rule. Recall that the direction of current is taken opposite to the direction
of motion of electrons. The force is therefore directed into the page.

QUESTIONS

1. Which of the following property of a proton can change while it moves
Jreely in a magnetic field? (There may be more than one correct answer.)

(a) mass (b) speed

(c) velocity (a) momentum

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 1

Page_Number 231 ended
/n
Page_Number 232 started
2. In Activity 13.7, how do we think the displacement of rod AB will be
affected if (i) current in rod AB is increased; (ii) a stronger horse-shoe
magnet is used; and (iii) length of the rod AB is increased?

3. A positively-charged particle (alpha-particle) projected towards west is
deflected towards north by a magnetic field. The direction of magnetic
field is
(a) towards south (b) towards east
(c) downward (dq) upward

Magnetism in medicine

An electric current always produces a magnetic field. Even weak ion currents that
travel along the nerve cells in our body produce magnetic fields. When we touch
something, our nerves carry an electric impulse to the muscles we need to use. This

impulse produces a temporary magnetic field. These fields are very weak and are about
one-billionth of the earth’s magnetic field. Two main organs in the human body where
the magnetic field produced is significant, are the heart and the brain. The magnetic field
inside the body forms the basis of obtaining the images of different body parts. This is
done using a technique called Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Analysis of these
images helps in medical diagnosis. Magnetism has, thus, got important uses in medicine.

Split rings
(P and Q)

Figure 13.15
A simple electric motor

13.4 ELECTRIC MOTOR

An electric motor is a rotating device that converts electrical energy to
mechanical energy. Electric motor is used as an important component
in electric fans, refrigerators, mixers, washing machines, computers, MP3
players etc. Do you know how an electric motor works?

An electric motor, as shown in Fig. 13.15, consists of a rectangular
coil ABCD of insulated copper wire. The coil is placed between the two
poles of a magnetic field such that the arm AB and CD are perpendicular

K
+4HHH4H—(+}

to the direction of the magnetic field. The
ends of the coil are connected to the two
halves P and Q of a split ring. The inner sides
of these halves are insulated and attached
to an axle. The external conducting edges of
P and Q touch two conducting stationary
brushes X and Y, respectively, as shown in
the Fig. 13.15.

Current in the coil ABCD enters from the
source battery through conducting brush
X and flows back to the battery through
brush Y. Notice that the current in arm AB
of the coil flows from A to B. In arm CD it
flows from C to D, that is, opposite to the
direction of current through arm AB. On
applying Fleming’s left hand rule for the
direction of force on a current-carrying

Science

Page_Number 232 ended
/n
Page_Number 233 started
conductor in a magnetic field (see Fig. 13.13). We find that the force
acting on arm AB pushes it downwards while the force acting on arm
CD pushes it upwards. Thus the coil and the axle O, mounted free to
turn about an axis, rotate anti-clockwise. At half rotation, Q@ makes
contact with the brush X and P with brush Y. Therefore the current in
the coil gets reversed and flows along the path DCBA. A device that
reverses the direction of flow of current through a circuit is called a
commutator. In electric motors, the split ring acts as a commutator. The
reversal of current also reverses the direction of force acting on the two
arms AB and CD. Thus the arm AB of the coil that was earlier pushed
down is now pushed up and the arm CD previously pushed up is now
pushed down. Therefore the coil and the axle rotate halfa turn more in
the same direction. The reversing of the current is repeated at each half
rotation, giving rise to a continuous rotation of the coil and to the axle.

The commercial motors use (i) an electromagnet in place of permanent
magnet; (ii) large number of turns of the conducting wire in the current-
carrying coil; and (iii) a soft iron core on which the coil is wound. The
soft iron core, on which the coil is wound, plus the coils, is called an
armature. This enhances the power of the motor.

State Fleming’s left-hand rule.

What is the principle of an electric motor?

What is the role of the split ring in an electric motor?

13.5 ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION

We have studied that when a current-carrying conductor is placed ina
magnetic field such that the direction of current is perpendicular to the
magnetic field, it experiences a force. This force causes the conductor to
move. Now let us imagine a situation in which a conductor is moving
inside a magnetic field or a magnetic field is changing around a fixed
conductor. What will happen? This was first studied by English physicist
Michael Faraday. In 1831, Faraday made an important breakthrough
by discovering how a moving magnet can be used to generate electric
currents. To observe this effect, let us perform the following activity.

Activity 13.8

Take a coil of wire AB having a large number of turns.

Connect the ends of the coil to a galuanometer as shown in
Fig. 13.16.

Take a strong bar magnet and move its north pole towards the
end B of the coil. Do you find any change in the galvanometer
needle?

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current

Page_Number 233 ended
/n
Page_Number 234 started
There is a momentary deflection in the needle of
the galvanometer, say to the right. This indicates
the presence of a current in the coil AB. The
deflection becomes zero the moment the motion
of the magnet stops.

Now withdraw the north pole of the magnet away
from the coil. Now the galvanometer is deflected
toward the left, showing that the current is now
set up in the direction opposite to the first.
Place the magnet stationary at a point near to
the coil, keeping its north pole towards the end
B af the coil. We see that the galuanometer needle
deflects toward the right when the coil is moved
towards the north pole of the magnet. Similarly
the needle moves toward left when the coil is
moved away.

When the coil is kept stationary with respect to
the magnet, the deflection of the galuanometer
drops to zero, What do you conclude from this
activity?

Figure 13.16

Moving a magnet towards a cotl sets up a
current in the cotl circuit, as indicated by
deflection in the galvanometer needle.

A galvanometer is an instrument that can detect
the presence of acurrent in a circuit. The pointer
remains at zero (the centre of the scale) for zero
current flowing through it. It can deflect either
to the left or to the right of the zero mark
depending on the direction of current.

You can also check that if you had moved south pole of the magnet
towards the end B of the coil, the deflections in the galuanometer would
Just be opposite to the previous case. When the coil and the magnet are
both stationary, there is no deflection in the galvanometer. It is, thus,
clear from this activity that motion of a magnet with respect to the coil
produces an induced potential difference, which sets up an induced

electric current in the circuit.

Michael Faraday (1791-1867)

Michael Faraday was an experimental physicist. He had no formal
education. He worked in a book-binding shop during his early years.
He used to read books that came for binding. This way Faraday
developed his interest in science. He got an opportunity to listen to
some public lectures by Humphrey Davy of Royal Institute. He made
careful notes of Davy’s lectures and sent them to Davy. Soon he was
made an assistant in Davy’s laboratory at the Royal Institute. Faraday
made several path-breaking discoveries that include electromagnetic
induction and the laws of electrolysis. Several universities conferred

on him the honorary degrees but he turned down such honours. Faraday loved his

science work more than any honour.

Science

Page_Number 234 ended
/n
Page_Number 235 started
Let us now perform a variation of Activity 13.8 in which the moving
magnet is replaced by a current-carrying coil and the current in the coil
can be varied.

Activity 13.9

Take two different coils of copper wire having
large number of turns (say 50 and 100 turns
respectively). Insert them over a non-conducting
cylindrical roll, as shown in Fig. 13.17. (You may
use a thick paper roll for this purpose.)
Connect the coil-1, having larger number of
turns, in series with a battery and a plug key.
Also connect the other coil-2 with a
galvanometer as shown.

Plug in the key. Observe the galvanometer. Is
there a deflection in its needle? You will observe
that the needle of the galvanometer instantly
jumps to one side and just as quickly returns to
zero, indicating a momentary current in coil-2.
Disconnect coil-1 from the battery. You will
observe that the needle momentarily moves, but

Coil-1

to the opposite side. It means that now the Figure 13.17

Cy

Coil-2

current flows in the opposite direction in coil-2. Current is induced tn coll-2 when current
incoil-1 is changed

In this activity we observe that as soon as the current in coil- 1 reaches
either a steady value or zero, the galvanometer in coil-2 shows no
deflection.

From these observations, we conclude that a potential difference is
induced in the coil-2 whenever the electric current through the coil-1
is changing (starting or stopping). Coil-1 is called the primary coil and
coil-2 is called the secondary coil. As the current in the first coil changes,
the magnetic field associated with it also changes. Thus the magnetic
Jield lines around the secondary coil also change. Hence the change in
magnetic field lines associated with the secondary coil is the cause of
induced electric current in it. This process, by which a changing
magnetic field in a conductor induces a current in another conductor,
is called electromagnetic induction. In practice we can induce current
in a coil either by moving it in a magnetic field or by changing the
magnetic field around it. It is convenient in most situations to move
the coil in a magnetic field.

The induced current is found to be the highest when
the direction of motion of the coil is at right angles to the
magnetic field. In this situation, we can use a simple rule
to know the direction of the induced current. Stretch the
thumb, forefinger and middle finger of right hand so that c

. . ‘urrent
they are perpendicular to each other, as shown in induced
Fig. 13.18. If the forefinger indicates the direction of the im conductor
magnetic field and the thumb shows the direction of motion
of conductor, then the middle finger will show the direction
of induced current. This simple rule is called Fleming’s
right-hand rule.

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current

Magnetic field

Movement of
conductor

Motion
Field

Induced current

Figure 13.18
Fleming’s right-hand rule

Page_Number 235 ended
/n
Page_Number 236 started
Explain different ways to induce current in a coil.

13.6 ELECTRIC GENERATOR

Based on the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction, the experiments
studied above generate induced current, which is usually very small.
This principle is also employed to produce large currents for use in homes
and industry. In an electric generator, mechanical energy is used to rotate
a conductor in a magnetic field to produce electricity.
An electric generator, as shown in Fig. 13.19, consists of a rotating
rectangular coil ABCD placed between the two poles of a permanent
magnet. The two ends of this coil are connected to
the two rings R, and R,. The inner side of these
rings are made insulated. The two conducting
B c stationary brushes B, and B, are kept pressed
separately on the rings R, and R,, respectively. The
two rings R, and R, are internally attached to an
axle. The axle may be mechanically rotated from
——B rushes outside to rotate the coil inside the magnetic field.

Rings
(Ry and Ro) (8; andBg) Outer ends of the two brushes are connected to
the galvanometer to show the flow of current in the

Ny given external circuit.

When the axle attached to the two rings is
rotated such that the arm AB moves up (and the
Figure 13.19 arm CD moves down) in the magnetic field produced
Illustration of the by the permanent magnet. Let us say the coilABCD
principle of electric is rotated clockwise in the arrangement shown in Fig. 13.19. By applying
generator Fleming’s right-hand rule, the induced currents are set up in these arms

along the directions AB and CD. Thus an induced current flows in the
direction ABCD. If there are larger numbers of turns in the coil. the current
generated in each turn adds up to give a large current through the coil.
This means that the current in the external circuit flows from B, to B,.

Afier half a rotation, arm CD starts moving up and AB moving down.
As a result, the directions of the induced currents in both the arms
change, giving rise to the net induced current in the direction DCBA.
The current in the external circuit now flows from B, to B,, Thus after
every half rotation the polarity of the current in the respective arms
changes. Such a current, which changes direction after equal intervals
of time, is called an alternating current (abbreviated as AC). This device
is called an AC generator.

To get a direct current (DC, which does not change its direction with
time), a split-ring type commutator must be used. With this arrangement,
one brush is at all times in contact with the arm moving up in the field,
while the other is in contact with the arm moving down. We have seen
the working of a split ring commutator in the case of an electric motor

Science

Page_Number 236 ended
/n
Page_Number 237 started
(see Fig. 13.15). Thus a unidirectional current is produced. The generator
is thus called a DC generator.

The difference between the direct and alternating currents is that the
direct current always flows in one direction, whereas the alternating
current reverses its direction periodically. Most power stations
constructed these days produce AC. In India, the AC changes direction
after every 1/100 second, that is, the frequency of AC is 50 Hz. An
important advantage of AC over DC is that electric power can be
transmitted over long distances without much loss of energy.

QUESTIONS

State the principle of an electric generator.
Name some sources of direct current.
Which sources produce alternating current?

Choose the correct option.

A rectangular coil of copper wires is rotated in a magnetic field. The
direction of the induced current changes once in each

(a) two revolutions (b) one revolution

(c) half revolution (a) one-fourth revolution

13.7 DOMESTIC ELECTRIC CIRCUITS

Inour homes, we receive supply of electric power through a main supply
{also called mains), either supported through overhead electric poles or
by underground cables. One of the wires in this supply. usually with
red insulation cover, is called live wire (or positive). Another wire, with
black insulation, is called neutral wire (or negative). In our country, the
potential difference between the two is 220 V.

At the metre-board in the house, these wires pass into an electricity
meter through a main fuse. Through the main switch they are connected
to the line wires in the house. These wires supply electricity to separate
circuits within the house. Often, two separate circuits are used, one of
15 A current rating for appliances with higher power ratings such as
geysers, air coolers, etc. The other circuit is of 5 A current rating for
bulbs, fans, etc. The earth wire, which has insulation of green colour, is
usually connected to a metal plate deep in the earth near the house.
This is used as a safety measure, especially for those appliances that
have a metallic body, for example, electric press, toaster, table fan.
refrigerator, etc. The metallic body is connected to the earth wire, which
provides a low-resistance conducting path for the current. Thus, it
ensures that any leakage of current to the metallic body of the appliance
keeps its potential to that of the earth, and the user may not get a severe
electric shock.

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current

Page_Number 237 ended
/n
Page_Number 238 started
Earch
wire
Live a a
Neutral
wire i
Electricity Electricity
board’s fuse meter
Distribution
Box containing

main switch and fuses
for each circuit

Figure 13.20 A schematic diagram of one of the common domestic circuits

Figure 13.20 gives a schematic diagram of one of the common
domestic circuits. In each separate circuit, different appliances can be
connected across the live and neutral wires. Each appliance has a
separate switch to ‘ON’/‘OFF’ the flow of current through it. In order
that each appliance has equal potential difference, they are connected
parallel to each other.

Electric fuse is an important component of all domestic circuits. We
have already studied the principle and working of a fuse in the previous
chapter (see Section 12.7). A fuse in a circuit prevents damage to the
appliances and the circuit due to overloading. Overloading can occur
when the live wire and the neutral wire come into direct contact. (This
occurs when the insulation of wires is damaged or there is a fault in the
appliance.) In such a situation, the current in the circuit abruptly
increases. This is called short-circuiting. The use of an electric fuse
prevents the electric circuit and the appliance from a possible damage
by stopping the flow of unduly high electric current. The Joule heating
that takes place in the fuse melts it to break the electric circuit.
Overloading can also occur due to an accidental hike in the supply
voltage. Sometimes overloading is caused by connecting too many
appliances to a single socket.

Q UES TION S

Name two safety measures commonly used in electric circuits and
appliances.

An electric oven of 2 kW power rating is operated in a domestic electric
circuit (220 V) that has a current rating of 5 A. What result do you
expect? Explain.

What precaution should be taken to avoid the overloading of domestic
electric circuits?

Science

Page_Number 238 ended
/n
Page_Number 239 started
A compass needle is a small magnet. Its one end, which points towards north, is
called a north pole, and the other end, which points towards south, is called a
south pole.

A magnetic field exists in the region surrounding a magnet, in which the force of
the magnet can be detected.

Field lines are used to represent a magnetic field. A field line is the path along
which a hypothetical free north pole would tend to move. The direction of the
magnetic field at a point is given by the direction that a north pole placed at that
point would take. Field lines are shown closer together where the magnetic field is
greater.

A metallic wire carrying an electric current has associated with it a magnetic field.
The field lines about the wire consist of a series of concentric circles whose direction
is given by the right-hand rule.

The pattern of the magnetic field around a conductor due to an electric current
flowing through it depends on the shape of the conductor. The magnetic field of a
solenoid carrying a current is similar to that of a bar magnet.

An electromagnet consists of a core of soft iron wrapped around with a coil of
insulated copper wire.

A current-carrying conductor when placed in a magnetic field experiences a force.
If the direction of the field and that of the current are mutually perpendicular to
each other, then the force acting on the conductor will be perpendicular to both
and will be given by Fleming’s left-hand rule. This is the basis of an electric motor.
An electric motor is a device that converts electric energy into mechanical energy.

The phenomenon of electromagnetic induction is the production of induced current
ina coil placed in a region where the magnetic field changes with time. The magnetic
field may change due to a relative motion between the coil and a magnet placed
near to the coil. If the coil is placed near to a current-carrying conductor, the
magnetic field may change either due to a change in the current through the
conductor or due to the relative motion between the coil and conductor. The
direction of the induced current is given by the Fleming’s right-hand rule.

A generator converts mechanical energy into electrical energy. It works on the basis
of electromagnetic induction.

Inour houses we receive AC electric power of 220 V with a frequency of 50 Hz. One
of the wires in this supply is with red insulation, called live wire. The other one is of
black insulation, which is a neutral wire. The potential difference between the two
is 220 V. The third is the earth wire that has green insulation and this is connected
to a metallic body deep inside earth. It is used as a safety measure to ensure that
any leakage of current to a metallic body does not give any severe shock to a user.

Fuse is the most important safety device, used for protecting the circuits due to
short-circuiting or overloading of the circuits.

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current

Page_Number 239 ended
/n
Page_Number 240 started
Which of the following correctly describes the magnetic field near a long
straight wire?

(@)
(b)
(co)
(ad)

The field consists of straight lines perpendicular to the wire.
The field consists of straight lines parallel to the wire.
The field consists of radial lines originating from the wire.

The field consists of concentric circles centred on the wire.

The phenomenon of electromagnetic induction is

(a)
(b)

(co)

(d

the process of charging a body.
the process of generating magnetic field due to a current passing
through a coil.

producing induced current in a coil due to relative motion between a
magnet and the coil.

the process of rotating a coil of an electric motor.

The device used for producing electric current is called a

(@)
(b)
(co)
(ad)

generator.
galvanometer.
ammeter.

motor.

The essential difference between an AC generator and a DC generator is that

(a)

(b)
(co)
@)

AC generator has an electromagnet while a DC generator has
permanent magnet.

DC generator will generate a higher voltage.
AC generator will generate a higher voltage.
AC generator has slip rings while the DC generator has a commutator.

. At the time of short circuit, the current in the circuit

(@)
(b)
(co)
(ad)

reduces substantially.
does not change.
increases heavily.

vary continuously.

State whether the following statements are true or false.

(a)
(b)
(co)

(d

An electric motor converts mechanical energy into electrical energy.
An electric generator works on the principle of electromagnetic induction.

The field at the centre of a long circular coil carrying current will be
parallel straight lines.

A wire with a green insulation is usually the live wire of an electric supply.

List three sources of magnetic fields.

Science

Page_Number 240 ended
/n
Page_Number 241 started
How does a solenoid behave like a magnet? Can you determine the north and
south poles of a current-carrying solenoid with the help of a bar magnet? Explain.

. Whenis the force experienced by a current-carrying conductor placed in a magnetic
field largest?

. Imagine that you are sitting in a chamber with your back to one wall. An electron
beam, moving horizontally from back wall towards the front wall, is deflected by a
strong magnetic field to your right side. What is the direction of magnetic field?

. Draw a labelled diagram of an electric motor. Explain its principle and working.
What is the function of a split ring in an electric motor?

. Name some devices in which electric motors are used.

. Acoil of insulated copper wire is connected to a galvanometer. What will happen if
a bar magnet is (i) pushed into the coil, (ii) withdrawn from inside the coil, (iii) held
stationary inside the coil?

Two circular coils A and B are placed closed to each other. If the current in the coil
A is changed, will some current be induced in the coil B? Give reason.

State the rule to determine the direction of a (i) magnetic field produced around a
straight conductor-carrying current, (ii) force experienced by a current-carrying
straight conductor placed in a magnetic field which is perpendicular to it, and
iii) current induced in a coil due to its rotation in a magnetic field.

. Explain the underlying principle and working of an electric generator by drawing
a labelled diagram. What is the function of brushes?

When does an electric short circuit occur?

What is the function of an earth wire? Why is it necessary to earth metallic
appliances?

Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 41

Page_Number 241 ended
/n
Page_Number 242 started
CHAPTER 1 4

Sources of

i Energy

ft. Class IX, we learnt that the total energy during a physical or chemical
process is conserved. Why, then, do we hear so much about the energy
crisis? If energy can neither be created nor destroyed, we should have
no worries! We should be able to perform endless activities without
thinking about energy resources!

This riddle can be solved if we recall what else we learnt about energy.
Energy comes in different forms and one form can be converted to another.
For example, ifwe drop a plate from a height, the potential energy of the
plate is converted mostly to sound energy when it hits the ground. If we
light a candle, the process is highly exothermic so that the chemical
energy in the wax is converted to heat energy and light energy on burning.
What other products are obtained when we burn a candle?

The total energy during a physical or chemical process remains the
same but suppose we consider the burning candle again — can we
somehow put together the heat and light generated along with the products
of the reaction to get back the chemical energy in the form of wax?

Let us consider another example. Suppose we take 100 mL of water
which has a temperature of 348 K (75°C) and leave it in a room where
the temperature is 298 K (25°C). What will happen? Is there any way of
collecting all the heat lost to the environment and making the water hot
once it has cooled down?

In any example that we consider we will see that energy, in the usable
Jjorm, is dissipated to the surroundings in less usable forms. Hence, any
source of energy we use, to do work, is consumed and cannot be used again.

14.1 WHAT IS A GOOD SOURCE OF ENERGY?

What can then be considered a good source of energy? We, in our daily
lives, use energy from various sources for doing work. We use diesel to
run our trains. We use electricity to light our street-lamps. Or we use
energy in our muscles to cycle to school.

Activity 14.1

List four forms of energy that you use from morning, when you
wake up, till you reach the school.

From where do we get these different forms of energy?

Can we call these ‘sources’ of energy? Why or why not?

Page_Number 242 ended
/n
Page_Number 243 started
The muscular energy for carrying out physical work, electrical energy
jor running various appliances, chemical energy for cooking food or
running a vehicle all come from some source. We need to know how do
we select the source needed for obtaining the energy in its usable form.

Activity 14.2

Consider the various options we have when we choose a fuel for
cooking our food.

What are the criteria you would consider when trying to categorise
something as a good fuel?

Would your choice be different if you lived

(a) in a forest?

(b) in a remote mountain village or small island?

(c) in New Delhi?

(d) lived five centuries ago?

How are the factors different in each case?

After going through the two activities above, we can see that the
particular source of energy, or fuel, we select for performing some work
depends on many different factors. For example, while selecting a fuel,
we would ask ourselves the following questions.

(@) How much heat does it release on burning?

(i) Does it produce a lot of smoke?

iii) Is it easily available?

Can you think of three more relevant questions to ask about a fuel?

Given the range of fuels we have today, what are the factors which
would limit our choices when it comes to a particular task like cooking
our food? Would the fuel selected also depend on the work to be done?
For example, would we choose one fuel for cooking and another for
heating the room in winter?

We could then say that a good source of energy would be one

= which would doa large amount of work per unit volume or mass,

= be easily accessible,

= be easy to store and transport, and

= perhaps most importantly, be economical.

What is a good source of energy?

What is a good fuel?

If you could use any source of energy for heating your food, which one
would you use and why?

Sources of Energy 4

Page_Number 243 ended
/n
Page_Number 244 started
Figure 14.1

Ple-chart showing the
major sources of energy
Jor our requirements tr
India

14.2 CONVENTIONAL SOURCES OF ENERGY
14.2.1 Fossil Fuels

In ancient times, wood was the most common source of heat energy. The
energy of flowing water and wind was also used for limited activities. Can
you think of some of these uses? The exploitation of coal as a source of
energy made the industrial revolution possible. Increasing
industrialisation has led to a better quality of life all over the world. It has
also caused the global demand for energy to grow at a tremendous rate.
The growing demand for energy was largely met by the fossil fuels — coal
and petroleum. Our technologies were also developed for using these
energy sources. But these fuels were formed over millions of years ago
and there are only limited reserves. The fossil fuels are non-renewable

sources of energy, so we need to conserve
i Coal them. Ifwe were to continue consuming these
MW Petroleum and NaturalGas Sources at such alarming rates, we would
soon run out of energy! In order to avoid this,

Hydi
“ve alternate sources of energy were explored.
Nuclear But we continue to be largely dependent on
Wind fossil fuels for most of our energy

requirements (Fig. 14.1).

Burning fossil fuels has other disadvantages too. We learnt in Class LX
about the air pollution caused by burning of coal or petroleum products.
The oxides of carbon, nitrogen and sulphur that are released on burning

Jossil fuels are acidic oxides. These lead to acid rain which affects our
water and soil resources. In addition to the problem of air pollution,
recall the green-house effect of gases like carbon dioxide.

Think it over

How would our lives change if we could no longer get electricity supply?

The availability of electrical energy to each individual in a country is one of the
parameters to measure the growth of the country.

44

The pollution caused by burning fossil fuels can be somewhat reduced
by increasing the efficiency of the combustion process and using various
techniques to reduce the escape of harmful gases and ashes into the
surroundings. Besides being used directly for various purposes — in gas
stoves and vehicles, do you know fossil fuels are the major fuels used for
generating electricity? Let us produce some electricity at our own small
plant in the class and see what goes into producing our favourite form

ofenergy.

Activity 14.3

= Take a table-tennis ball and make three slits into it.

Put semicircular (S) fins cut out of a metal sheet into these slits.

= Pivot the tennis ball on an axle through its centre with a straight
metal wire fixed to a rigid support. Ensure that the tennis ball
rotates freely about the axle.

Science

Page_Number 244 ended
/n
Page_Number 245 started
Now connect a cycle dynamo to this.

Connect a bulb in series.

Direct a jet of water or steam produced in a pressure cooker at the
Jins (Fig. 14.2). What do you observe?

Steam pipe

Pressure—-+|
cooker

ah
Tennis ball fitted

Heat with metal sheets

Figure 14.2 A model to demonstrate the process of thermoelectric production

This is our turbine for generating electricity. The simplest turbines
have one moving part, a rotor-blade assembly. The moving fluid acts on
the blades to spin them and impart energy to the rotor. Thus, we see
that basically we need to move the fan, the rotor blade, with speed which
would turn the shaft of the dynamo and convert the mechanical energy
into electrical energy — the form of energy which has become a necessity
in today’s scenario. The various ways in which this can be done depends
upon availability of the resources. We will see how various sources of
energy can be harnessed to run the turbine and generate electricity in
the following sections.

14.2.2 Thermal Power Plant

Large amount of fossil fuels are burnt every day in power stations to
heat up water to produce steam which further runs the turbine to
generate electricity. The transmission of electricity is more efficient than
transporting coal or petroleum over the same distance. Therefore, many
thermal power plants are set up near coal or oil fields. The term thermal
power plant is used since fuel is burnt to produce heat energy which is
converted into electrical energy.

14.2.3 Hydro Power Plants

Another traditional source of energy was the kinetic energy of flowing
water or the potential energy of water at a height. Hydro power plants
convert the potential energy of falling water into electricity. Since there
are very few water-falls which could be used as a source of potential
energy. hydro power plants are associated with dams. In the last century,
a large number of dams were built all over the world. As we can see from
Fig. 14.1, a quarter of our energy requirement in India is met by hydro
power plants.

Sources of Energy

Page_Number 245 ended
/n
Page_Number 246 started
Reservoir

Sluice
gates

In order to produce hydel electricity.
high-rise dams are constructed on the river
to obstruct the flow of water and thereby
collect water in larger reservoirs. The water
level rises and in this process the kinetic
energy of flowing water gets transformed into
potential energy. The water from the high
level in the dam is carried through pipes, to
the turbine, at the bottom of the dam
(Fig. 14.3). Since the water in the reservoir

Powerlines

would be refilled each time it rains (hydro

To river
ei toould nol have to worry about hydro
would not have to worry about hydro

Figure 14.3
A schematic view of a
hydro power plant

electricity sources getting used up the way
Jossil fuels would get finished one day.

But, constructions of big dams have certain problems associated
with it. The dams can be constructed only in a limited number of places,
preferably in hilly terrains. Large areas of agricultural land and human
habitation are to be sacrificed as they get submerged. Large eco-systems
are destroyed when submerged under the water in dams. The vegetation
which is submerged rots under anaerobic conditions and gives rise to
large amounts of methane which is also a green-house gas. It creates
the problem of satisfactory rehabilitation of displaced people. Opposition
to the construction of Tehri Dam on the river Ganga and Sardar Sarovar
project on the river Narmada are due to such problems.

14.2.4 Improvements in the Technology for using
Conventional Sources of Energy

Bio-Mass

We mentioned earlier that wood has been used as a fuel for a long time.
If we can ensure that enough trees are planted, a continuous supply of
Jire-wood can be assured. You must also be familiar with the use of
cow-dung cakes as a fuel. Given the large live-stock population in India,
this can also assure us a steady source of fuel. Since these fuels are
plant and animal products, the source of these fuels is said to be
bio-mass. These fuels, however, do not produce much heat on burning
and a lot of smoke is given out when they are burnt. Therefore,
technological inputs to improve the efficiency of these fuels are necessary.
When wood is burnt in a limited supply of oxygen, water and volatile
materials present in it get removed and charcoal is left behind as the
residue. Charcoal burns without flames, is comparatively smokeless and
has a higher heat generation efficiency.

Similarly, cow-dung, various plant materials like the residue after
harvesting the crops, vegetable waste and sewage are decomposed in
the absence of oxygen to give bio-gas. Since the starting material is mainly
cow-dung, it is popularly known as ‘gobar-gas’. Bio-gas is produced in
a plant as shown in Fig. 14.4.

Science

Page_Number 246 ended
/n
Page_Number 247 started
The plant has a dome-like structure built with
bricks. A slurry of cow-dung and water is made in
the mixing tank from where it is fed into the digester.
The digester is a sealed chamber in which there is no
oxygen. Anaerobic micro-organisms that do not
require oxygen decompose or break down complex
compounds of the cow-dung slurry. It takes a few
days for the decomposition process to be complete
and generate gases like methane, carbon dioxide,
hydrogen and hydrogen sulphide. The bio-gas is
stored in the gas tank above the digester from which
they are drawn through pipes for use.

Bio-gas is an excellent fuel as it contains up to 75% methane. It
burns without smoke, leaves no residue like ash in wood, charcoal and
coal burning. Its heating capacity is high. Bio-gas is also used for lighting.
The slurry left behind is removed periodically and used as excellent
manure, rich in nitrogen and phosphorous. The large-scale utilisation
of bio-waste and sewage material provides a safe and efficient method of
waste-disposal besides supplying energy and manure. Do you think
that bio-mass is a renewable source of energy?

Gas outlet
Manure

uo Ga
Soil Fertiliser
Outlet

Digester

Figure 14.4
Schematic diagram of a bio-gas plant

Wind Energy

We saw in Class LX how unequal heating of the landmass
and water bodies by solar radiation generates air movement
and causes winds to blow. This kinetic energy of the wind
can be used to do work. This energy was harnessed by
windmills in the past to do mechanical work. For example,
in a water-lifting pump, the rotatory motion of windmill is
utilised to lift water from a well. Today, wind energy is also
used to generate electricity. A windmill essentially consists
of a structure similar to a large electric fan that is erected at
some height on a rigid support (Fig. 14.5).

To generate electricity, the rotatory motion of the windmill
is used to turn the turbine of the electric generator. The
output of a single windmill is quite small and cannot be used

Jor commercial purposes. Therefore, a number of windmills
are erected over a large area, which is known as wind energy
Jarm. The energy output of each windmill in a farm is coupled
together to get electricity on a commercial scale.

Denmark is called the country of ‘winds’. More than 25% of their electricity needs are
generated through a vast network of windmills. In terms of total output, Germany is

the leader, while India is ranked fifth in harnessing wind energy for the production of
electricity. Itis estimated that nearly 45,000 MW of electrical power can be generated if
India’s wind potential is fully exploited. The largest wind energy farm has been
established near Kanyakumari in Tamil Nadu and it generates 380 MW of electricity.

Sources of Energy 4

Page_Number 247 ended
/n
Page_Number 248 started
Wind energy is an environment-friendly and efficient source of
renewable energy. It requires no recurring expenses for the production
of electricity. But there are many limitations in harnessing wind energy.
Firstly, wind energy farms can be established only at those places where
wind blows for the greater part of a year. The wind speed should also be
higher than 15 km/h to maintain the required speed of the turbine.
Furthermore, there should be some back-up facilities (like storage cells)
to take care of the energy needs during a period when there is no wind.
Establishment of wind energy farms requires large area of land. For a
1 MW generator, the farm needs about 2 hectares of land. The initial
cost of establishment of the farm is quite high. Moreover, since the tower
and blades are exposed to the vagaries of nature like rain, Sun, storm
and cyclone, they need a high level of maintenance.

QUESTIONS

What are the disadvantages of fossil fuels?

Why are we looking at alternate sources of energy?

How has the traditional use of wind and water energy been modified for
our convenience?

14.3 ALTERNATIVE OR NON-CONVENTIONAL
SOURCES OF ENERGY

With technological progress, our demand for energy increases day by
day. Our life-styles are also changing, we use machines to do more and
more of our tasks. Our basic requirements are also increasing as
industrialisation improves our living standards.

Activity 14.4

= Find out from your grand-parents or other elders —
(a) how did they go to school?
(b) how did they get water for their daily needs when they were young?
(c) what means of entertainment did they use?

= Compare the above answers with how you do these tasks now.

= Is there a difference? If yes, in which case more energy from
external sources is consumed?

As our demand for energy increases, we need to look for more and
more sources of energy. We could develop the technology to use the
available or known sources of energy more efficiently and also look to
new sources of energy. Any new source of energy we seek to exploit
would need specific devices developed with that source in mind. We shall
now look at some of the latest sources of energy that we seek to tap, and
the technology designed to capture and store energy from that source.

Think it over!

Some people say that if we start living as our ancestors, this would conserve energy and
our ecosystem. Do you think this idea is feasible?

2 Science

Page_Number 248 ended
/n
Page_Number 249 started
14.3.1 Solar Energy

The Sun has been radiating an enormous amount of energy at the present
rate for nearly 5 billion years and will continue radiating at that rate for
about 5 billion years more. Only a small part of solar energy reaches the
outer layer of the earth’s atmosphere. Nearly half of it is absorbed while
passing through the atmosphere and the rest reaches the earth's surface.

India is lucky to receive solar energy for greater part of the year. It is estimated that
during a year India receives the energy equivalent to more than 5.000 trillion kWh.
Under clear (cloudless) sky conditions, the daily average varies from 4 to 7 kWh/m’.

The solar energy reaching unit area at outer edge of the earth’s atmosphere exposed
perpendicularly to the rays of the Sun at the average distance between the Sun and
earth is known as the solar constant. It is estimated to be approximately 1.4 kJ per

second per square metre or 1.4 kW/m?.

Activity 14.5

= Take two conical flasks and paint one white and the other black.

Fill both with water.

= Place the conical flasks in direct sunlight for half an hour to one

hour.

= Touch the conical flasks. Which one is hotter? You could also
measure the temperature of the water in the two conical flasks

with a thermometer.

= Can you think of ways in which this finding could be used in your

daily life?

A black surface absorbs more heat as
compared to a white or a reflecting surface
under identical conditions. Solar cookers
(Fig. 14.6) and solar water heaters use this
property in their working. Some solar cookers
achieve a higher temperature by using mirrors
to focus the rays of the Sun. Solar cookers are
covered with a glass plate. Recall what we have
learnt about the green-house effect. Does this
explain why a glass plate is used?

Activity 14.6

= Study the structure and working of a
solar cooker and/or a solar water-heater,
particularly with regard to how it is
insulated and maximum heat absorption
is ensured.

Sources of Energy

Sun rays
being
reflected

Figure 14.6 A solar cooker

Page_Number 249 ended
/n
Page_Number 250 started
Figure 14.7
A solar cell panel

Design and build a solar cooker or water-heater using low-cost
material available and check what temperatures are achieved in
your system.

Discuss what would be the advantages and limitations of using
the solar cooker or water-heater.

It is easy to see that these devices are useful only at certain times
during the day. This limitation of using solar energy is overcome by
using solar cells that convert solar energy into electricity. A typical cell
develops a voltage of 0.5-1 V and can produce about 0.7 W of electricity
when exposed to the Sun. A large number of solar cells are, combined
in an arrangement called solar cell panel (Fig. 14.7) that can deliver
enough electricity for practical use.

The principal advantages associated with solar cells are that they
have no moving parts, require little maintenance and work quite
satisfactorily without the use of any focussing device. Another advantage
is that they can be set up in remote and inaccessible hamlets or very
sparsely inhabited areas in which laying of a power transmission line
may be expensive and not commercially viable.

Silicon, which is used for making solar cells, is abundant in nature
but availability of the special grade silicon for making solar cells is limited.
The entire process of manufacture is still very expensive, silver used for
interconnection of the cells in the panel further adds to the cost. In spite
of the high cost and low efficiency, solar cells are used for many scientific
and technological applications. Artificial satellites and space probes like
Mars orbiters use solar cells as the main source of energy. Radio or
wireless transmission systems or TV relay stations in remote locations
use solar cell panels. Traffic signals, calculators and many toys are fitted
with solar cells. The solar cell panels are mounted on specially designed
inclined roof tops so that more solar energy is incident over it. The
domestic use of solar cells is, however, limited due to its high cost.

14.3.2 Energy from the Sea

Tidal Energy

Due to the gravitational pull of mainly the moon on the spinning earth,
the level of water in the sea rises and falls. If you live near the sea or ever
travel to some place near the sea, try and observe how the sea-level
changes during the day. This phenomenon is called high and low tides
and the difference in sea-levels gives us tidal energy. Tidal energy is
harnessed by constructing a dam across a narrow opening to the sea. A
turbine fixed at the opening of the dam converts tidal energy to electricity.
As you can guess, the locations where such dams can be built are limited.

Wave Energy

Similarly. the kinetic energy possessed by huge waves near the sea-
shore can be trapped in a similar manner to generate electricity.
The waves are generated by strong winds blowing across the sea. Wave
energy would be a viable proposition only where waves are very strong.
A wide variety of devices have been developed to trap wave energy for
rotation of turbine and production of electricity.

Science

Page_Number 250 ended
/n
Page_Number 251 started
Ocean Thermal Energy
The water at the surface of the sea or ocean is heated by the Sun while
the water in deeper sections is relatively cold. This difference in
temperature is exploited to obtain energy in ocean-thermal-energy
conversion plants. These plants can operate if the temperature difference
between the water at the surface and water at depths up to 2 km is
293 K (20°C) or more. The warm surface-water is used to boil a volatile
liquid like ammonia. The vapours of the liquid are then used to run the
turbine of generator. The cold water from the depth of the ocean is
pumped up and condense vapour again to liquid.

The energy potential from the sea (tidal energy, wave energy and
ocean thermal energy) is quite large, but efficient commercial exploitation
is difficult.

14.3.3 Geothermal Energy

Due to geological changes, molten rocks formed in the deeper hot regions
ofearth’s crust are pushed upward and trapped in certain regions called
‘hot spots’. When underground water comes in contact with the hot spot.
steam is generated. Sometimes hot water from that region finds outlets
at the surface. Such outlets are known as hot springs. The steam trapped
in rocks is routed through a pipe to a turbine and used to generate
electricity. The cost of production would not be much, but there are
very few commercially viable sites where such energy can be exploited.
There are number of power plants based on geothermal energy
operational in New Zealand and United States of America.

14.3.4 Nuclear Energy

How is nuclear energy generated? In a process called nuclear fission,
the nucleus of a heavy atom (such as uranium, plutonium or thorium).
when bombarded with low-energy neutrons, can be split apart into lighter
nuclei. When this is done, a tremendous amount of energy is released if
the mass of the original nucleus is just a little more than the sum of the
masses of the individual products. The fission of an atom of uranium,
jor example, produces 10 million times the energy produced by the
combustion of an atom of carbon from coal. In a nuclear reactor designed
Jor electric power generation, such nuclear ‘fuel’ can be part of a self-
sustaining fission chain reaction that releases energy at a controlled
rate. The released energy can be used to produce steam and further
generate electricity.

Ina nuclear fission, the difference in mass, Am, between the original nucleus and the
product nuclei gets converted to energy Eat arate governed by the famous equation,
E=Ame.

Jirst derived by Albert Einstein in 1905, where c is the speed of light in vacuum. In
nuclear science, energy is often expressed in units of electron volts (eV): 1 eV = 1.602
x 1079 joules. Itis easy to check from the above equation that 1 atomic mass unit (u)
is equivalent to about 931 mega electron volts (MeV) of energy.

Sources of Energy 21

Page_Number 251 ended
/n
Page_Number 252 started
Nuclear power reactors located at Tarapur (Maharashtra). Rana Pratap Sagar
(Rajasthan), Kalpakkam (Tamil Nadu), Narora (UP), Kakrapar (Gujarat) and Kaiga
(Karnataka) have the installed capacity of less than 3% of the total electricity generation
capacity of our country. However, many industrialised countries are meeting more
than 30% of their electrical power needs from nuclear reactors.

The major hazard of nuclear power generation is the storage and
disposal of spent or used fuels — the uranium still decaying into harmful
subatomic particles (radiations). Improper nuclear-waste storage and
disposal result in environmental contamination. Further there is a risk
of accidental leakage of nuclear radiation. The high cost of installation
of a nuclear power plant, high risk of environmental contamination and
limited availability of uranium makes large-scale use of nuclear energy
prohibitive.

Nuclear energy was first used for destructive purposes before nuclear
power stations were designed. The fundamental physics of the fission
chain reaction in a nuclear weapon is similar to the physics of a controlled
nuclear reactor, but the two types of device are engineered quite
differently.

Nuclear fusion

Currently all commercial nuclear reactors are based on nuclear fission. But there is
another possibility of nuclear energy generation by a safer process called nuclear
Jusion. Fusion means joining lighter nuclei to make a heavier nucleus, most commonly
hydrogen or hydrogen isotopes to create helium, such as

2H + 7H > *He (+n)
It releases a tremendous amount of energy, according to the Einstein equation, as
the mass of the product is little less than the sum of the masses of the original individual
nuclei.
Such nuclear fusion reactions are the source of energy in the Sun and other stars. It
takes considerable energy to force the nuclei to fuse. The conditions needed for this
process are extreme — millions of degrees of temperature and millions of pascals of
pressure.
The hydrogen bomb is based on thermonuclear fusion reaction. A nuclear bomb based
on the fission of uranium or plutonium is placed at the core of the hydrogen bomb.
This nuclear bomb is embedded in a substance which contains deuterium and lithium.
When the nuclear bomb (based on fission) is detonated, the temperature of this substance
is raised to 10° K in a few microseconds. The high temperature generates sufficient
energy for the light nuclei to fuse and a devastating amount of energy is released.

Activity 14.7

Discuss in class the question of what is the ultimate source of
energy for bio-mass, wind and ocean thermal energy.

Is geothermal energy and nuclear energy different in this respect?
Why?

Where would you place hydro electricity and wave energy?

2 Science

Page_Number 252 ended
/n
Page_Number 253 started
QUES TIONS

What kind of mirror — concave, convex or plain — would be best suited
for use in a solar cooker? Why?

What are the limitations of the energy that can be obtained from the
oceans?

What is geothermal energy?
What are the advantages of nuclear energy?

14.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES

We have studied various sources of energy in the previous sections.
Exploiting any source of energy disturbs the environment in some way
or the other. In any given situation, the source we would choose depends
on factors such as the ease of extracting energy from that source, the
economics of extracting energy from the source, the efficiency of the
technology available and the environmental damage that will be caused
by using that source. Though we talk of ‘clean’ fuels like CNG. it would
be more exact to say that a particular source is cleaner than the other.
We have already seen that burning fossil fuels causes air pollution. In
some cases, the actual operation of a device like the solar cell may be
pollution-free, but the assembly of the device would have caused some
environmental damage. Research continues in these areas to produce
longer lasting devices that will cause less damage throughout their life.

Activity 14.8

Gather information about various energy sources and how each
one affects the environment.

Debate the merits and demerits of each source and select the
best source of energy on this basis.

QUESTIONS

Can any source of energy be pollution-free? Why or why not?

Hydrogen has been used as a rocket fuel. Would you consider it a cleaner
fuel than CNG? Why or why not?

14.5 HOW LONG WILL AN ENERGY SOURCE LAST US?

We saw earlier that we cannot depend on the fossil fuels for much longer.
Such sources that will get depleted some day are said to be exhaustible
sources or nor-renewable sources of energy. On the other hand, if we
manage bio-mass by replacing the trees we cut down for fire-wood, we
can be assured of a constant supply of energy at a particular rate. Such
energy sources that can be regenerated are called renewable sources of
energy.

Sources of Energy 2

Page_Number 253 ended
/n
Page_Number 254 started
Renewable energy is available in our natural environment, in the
Jjorm of some continuing or repetitive currents of energy, or is stored in
such large underground reservoirs that the rate of depletion of the
reservoir because of extraction of usable energy is practically negligible.

Activity 14.9

= Debate the following two issues in class.

(a) The estimated coal reserves are said to be enough to last us
Jor another two hundred years. Do you think we need to worry
about coal getting depleted in this case? Why or why not?

(b) It is estimated that the Sun will last for another five billion
years. Do we have to worry about solar energy getting
exhausted? Why or why not?

= On the basis of the debate, decide which energy sources can be
considered (i) exhaustible, (ii) inexhaustible, (iii) renewable and
fiv) non-renewable. Give your reasons for each choice.

QUES TION §S

Name two energy sources that you would consider to be renewable. Give
reasons for your choices.

Give the names of two energy sources that you would consider to be
exhaustible. Give reasons for your choices.

Our energy requirements increase with our standard of living.

In order to fulfil our energy requirements, we try to improve the efficiency of energy
usage and also try and exploit new sources of energy.

We also need to look for new sources of energy because the conventional sources of
energy like fossil fuels are in danger of getting exhausted soon.

The energy source we select would depend on factors like the ease and cost of
extracting energy from the source, the efficiency of the technology available for
using that source of energy and the environmental impact of using that source.

Many of the sources ultimately derive their energy from the Sun.

A solar water heater cannot be used to get hot water on
(a) asunny day. (b) acloudy day.
() ahot day. (2 awindy day.

2 Science

Page_Number 254 ended
/n
Page_Number 255 started
Which of the following is not an example of a bio-mass energy source?
(a) wood (b) gobar-gas
(c) nuclear energy (a) coal

Most of the sources of energy we use represent stored solar energy. Which of the
following is not ultimately derived from the Sun’s energy?

(a) geothermal energy (b) wind energy

(c) nuclear energy (da) bio-mass.

Compare and contrast fossil fuels and the Sun as direct sources of energy.
Compare and contrast bio-mass and hydro electricity as sources of energy.
What are the limitations of extracting energy from—

(a) the wind? (b) waves? (c) tides?

On what basis would you classify energy sources as

(a) renewable and non-renewable?

(b) exhaustible and inexhaustible?

Are the options given in (a) and (b) the same?

What are the qualities of an ideal source of energy?

What are the advantages and disadvantages of using a solar cooker? Are there
places where solar cookers would have limited utility?

What are the environmental consequences of the increasing demand for energy?
What steps would you suggest to reduce energy consumption?

Sources of Energy 2

Page_Number 255 ended
/n
Page_Number 256 started
CHAPTER 1 5

Our Environment
oe. N

Wi have heard the word ‘environment’ often being used on the
television, in newspapers and by people around us. Our elders tell
us that the ‘environment’ is not what it used to be earlier; others say that
we should work in a healthy ‘environment’; and global summits involving
the developed and developing countries are regularly held to discuss
‘environmental issues. In this chapter, we shall be studying how various
Jactors in the environment interact with each other and how we impact
the environment. In Class IX, we saw how different materials are cycled
in the environment in separate biogeochemical cycles. In these cycles,
essential nutrients like nitrogen, carbon, oxygen and water are changed
Jrom one form to another. We shall now see how human activities affect
these cycles.

15.1 WHAT HAPPENS WHEN WE ADD OUR WASTE TO
THE ENVIRONMENT?

In our daily activities, we generate a lot of material that are thrown
away. What are some of these waste materials? What happens after we
throw them away? Let us perform an activity to find answers to these
questions.

Activity 15.1

Collect waste material from your homes. This could include all
the waste generated during a day, like kitchen waste (spoilt food,
vegetable peels, used tea leaves, milk packets and empty cartons),
waste paper, empty medicine botiles/strips/bubble packs, old and
torn clothes and broken footwear.

Bury this material in a pit in the school garden or if there is no
space available, you can collect the material in an old bucket/
flower pot and cover with at least 15 cm of soil.

Keep this material moist and observe at 15-day intervals.

What are the materials that remain unchanged over long periods
of time?

What are the materials which change their form and structure
over time?

Of these materials that are changed, which ones change the
fastest?

Page_Number 256 ended
/n
Page_Number 257 started
We have seen in the chapter on ‘Life Processes’ that the food we eat is
digested by various enzymes in our body. Have you ever wondered why
the same enzyme does not break-down everything we eat? Enzymes are
specific in their action, specific enzymes are needed for the break-down
of a particular substance. That is why we will not get any energy if we
try to eat coal! Because of this, many human-made materials like plastics
will not be broken down by the action of bacteria or other saprophytes.
These materials will be acted upon by physical processes like heat and
pressure, but under the ambient conditions found in our envirorument,
these persist for a long time.

Substances that are broken down by biological processes are said
to be biodegradable. How many of the substances you buried were
biodegradable? Substances that are not broken down in this manner
are said to be non-biodegradable. These substances may be inert and
simply persist in the environment for a long time or may harm the various
members of the eco-system.

Activity 15.2

Use the library or internet to find out more about biodegradable
and non-biodegradable substances.

How long are various non-biodegradable substances expected to
last in our environment?

These days, new types of plastics which are said to be biodegradable
are available. Find out more about such materials and whether
they do or do not harm the environment.

Why are some substances biodegradable and some non-biodegradable?

Give any two ways in which biodegradable substances would affect the
environment.

Give any two ways in which non-biodegradable substances would affect
the environment.

15.2 ECO-SYSTEM — WHAT ARE ITS COMPONENTS?

All organisms such as plants, animals, microorganisms and human
beings as well as the physical surroundings interact with each other
and maintain a balance in nature. All the interacting organisms in an
area together with the non-living constituents of the environment form
an ecosystem. Thus, an ecosystem consists of biotic components
comprising living organisms and abiotic components comprising
physical factors like temperature, rainfall, wind, soil and minerals.

For example, if you visit a garden you will find different plants, such
as grasses, trees; flower bearing plants like rose, jasmine, sunflower;

Our Environment 2

Page_Number 257 ended
/n
Page_Number 258 started
and animals like frogs, insects and birds. All these living organisms
interact with each other and their growth, reproduction and other
activities are affected by the abiotic components of ecosystem. So a garden
is an ecosystem. Other types of ecosystems are forests, ponds and lakes.
These are natural ecosystems while gardens and crop-fields are human-
made (artificial) ecosystems.

Activity 15.3

You might have seen an aquarium. Let us try to design one.
What are the things that we need to keep in mind when we create
an aquarium? The fish would need a free space for swimming {it
could be a large jar), water, oxygen and food.

We can provide oxygen through an oxygen pump (aerator) and
fish food which is available in the market.

If we add a few aquatic plants and animals it can become a self-
sustaining system. Can you think how this happens? An aquarium
is an example of a human-made ecosystem.

Can we leave the aquarium as such after we set it up? Why does
it have to be cleaned once in a while? Do we have to clean ponds
or lakes in the same manner? Why or why not?

We have seen in earlier classes that organisms can be grouped as
producers, consumers and decomposers according to the manner in
which they obtain their sustenance from the environment. Let us recall
what we have learnt through the self sustaining ecosystem created by
us above. Which organisms can make organic compounds like sugar
and starch from inorganic substances using the radiant energy of the
Sun in the presence of chlorophyll? All green plants and certain blue-
green algae which can produce food by photosynthesis come under this
category and are called the producers.

Organisms depend on the producers either directly or indirectly for
their sustenance? These organisms which consume the food produced,
either directly from producers or indirectly by feeding on other consumers
are the consumers. Consumers can be classed variously as herbivores,
carnivores, omnivores and parasites. Can you give examples for each of
these categories of consumers?

= Imagine the situation where you do not clean the aquarium and
some fish and plants have died. Have you ever thought what
happens when an organism dies? The microorganisms, comprising
bacteria and fungi, break-down the dead remains and waste
products of organisms. These microorganisms are the decomposers
as they break-down the complex organic substances into simple
inorganic substances that go into the soil and are used up once
more by the plants. What will happen to the garbage, and dead
animals and plants in their absence? Will the natural replenishment
of the soil take place, even if decomposers are not there?

Science

Page_Number 258 ended
/n
Page_Number 259 started
Activity 15.4

While creating an aquarium did you take care not to put an aquatic
animal which would eat others? What would have happened
otherwise?

Make groups and discuss how each of the above groups of
organisms are dependent on each other.

Write the aquatic organisms in order of who eats whom and form

a chain of at least three steps. > >
Would you consider any one group of organisms to be of primary

importance? Why or why not?

15.2.1 Food Chains and Webs

InActivity 15.4 we have formed a series of organisms feeding
on one another. This series or organisms taking part at various
biotic levels form a food chain (Fig. 15.1).

Each step or level of the food chain forms a trophic level.
The autotrophs or the producers are at the first trophic level.
They fix up the solar energy and make it available for
heterotrophs or the consumers. The herbivores or the primary
consumers come at the second, small carnivores or the
secondary consumers at the third and larger carnivores or
the tertiary consumers form the fourth trophic level (Fig. 15.2).

We know that the food we eat acts as a fuel to provide us
energy to do work. Thus the interactions among various
components of the environment involves flow of energy from
one component of the system to another. As we have studied,
the autotrophs capture the energy present in sunlight and
convert it into chemical energy. This energy supports all the
activities of the living world. From autotrophs, the energy goes
to the heterotrophs and decomposers. However, as we saw in
the previous Chapter on ‘Sources of Energy’, when one form
of energy is changed to another, some energy is lost to the
environment in forms which cannot be used again. The flow
of energy between various components of the environment
has been extensively studied and it has been found that —

Figure 15.1

Food chain in nature
(a) in forest. (b) ir
grassland and (c) ina
pond

The green plants in a terrestrial ecosystem capture about
1% of the energy of sunlight that falls on their leaves and
convert it into food energy.

When green plants are eaten by primary consumers, a great
deal of energy is lost as heat to the environment, some amount
goes into digestion and in doing work and the rest goes
towards growth and reproduction. An average of 10% of the
Jjood eaten is turned into its own body and made available for

the next level of consumers.
Therefore, 10% can be taken as the average value for the

amount of organic matter that is present at each step and
reaches the next level of consumers.

Our Environment

Tertiary
consumers

Secondary
consumers
Primary consumers

Figure 15.2
Trophic levels

Page_Number 259 ended
/n
Page_Number 260 started
Figure 15.3
Food web, consisting of many jood chains

Some solar radiation

Solar is reflected by the
rechiation earth amd the
passes: atmosphere.
through:

the clear

atmosphere,

Most radiation is absorbed
by the earth's surface
and weirs it.

a Since so little energy is available for the
next level of consumers, food chains
generally consist of only three or four
steps. The loss of energy at each step is
so great that very little usable energy
remains after four trophic levels.

= There are generally a greater number
of individuals at the lower trophic levels
of an ecosystem, the greatest number
is of the producers.

= The length and complexity of food
chains vary greatly. Each organism is
generally eaten by two or more other
kinds of organisms which in turn are
eaten by several other organisms. So
instead of a straight line food chain, the
relationship can be shown as a series
of branching lines called a food web
(Fig. 15.3).

From the energy flow diagram (Fig. 15.4),
two things become clear. Firstly, the flow of
energy is unidirectional. The energy that is
captured by the autotrophs does not revert
back to the solar input and the energy which
passes to the herbivores does not come back
to autotrophs. As it moves progressively
through the various trophic levels it is no
longer available to the previous level.

Some of the infrared radiation passes
through the atmosphere, anxd some is
absorbed and re-emitted tn all
directions by greenhouse gas
molecules. The effect of this is to warm
the earth's surface and the lower
atmosphere

fnfrared radiation
is emitted from the
earth's surfaces,

Figure 15.4 Diagram showing flow of energy i an ecosystem

26

Science

Page_Number 260 ended
/n
Page_Number 261 started
Another interesting aspect of food chain is how unknowingly some
harmful chemicals enter our bodies through the food chain. You have
read in Class LX how water gets polluted. One of the reasons is the use of
several pesticides and other chemicals to protect our crops from diseases
and pests. These chemicals are either washed down into the soil or into
the water bodies. From the soil, these are absorbed by the plants along
with water and minerals, and from the water bodies these are taken up
by aquatic plants and animals. This is one of the ways in which they
enter the food chain. As these chemicals are not degradable, these get
accumulated progressively at each trophic level. As human beings occupy
the top level in any food chain, the maximum concentration of these
chemicals get accumulated in our bodies. This phenomenon is known
as biological magnification. This is the reason why our food grains such
as wheat and rice, vegetables and fruits, and even meat, contain varying
amounts of pesticide residues. They cannot always be removed by
washing or other means.

Activity 15.5

Newspaper reports about pesticide levels in ready-made food items
are often seen these days and some states have banned these
products. Debate in groups the need for such bans.

What do you think would be the source of pesticides in these food
items? Could pesticides get into our bodies from this source through
other food products too?

Discuss what methods could be applied to reduce our intake of
pesticides.

QUES TION S

What are trophic levels? Give an example of a food chain and state the
different trophic levels in it.

What is the role of decomposers in the ecosystem?

15.3 HOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THE
ENVIRONMENT?

We are an integral part of the environment. Changes in the environment
affect us and our activities change the environment around us. We have
already seen in Class LX how our activities pollute the envirorunent. In
this chapter, we shall be looking at two of the environmental problems
in detail, that is, depletion of the ozone layer and waste disposal.

Our Environment 261

Page_Number 261 ended
/n
Page_Number 262 started
262

15.3.1 Ozone Layer and How it is Getting Depleted

Ozone (O,) is a molecule formed by three atoms of oxygen. While O,,
which we normally refer to as oxygen. is essential for all aerobic forms of
life. Ozone, is a deadly poison. However, at the higher levels of the
atmosphere, ozone performs an essential function. It shields the surface
of the earth from ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the Sun. This radiation
is highly damaging to organisms, for example, it is known to cause skin
cancer in human beings.

Ozone at the higher levels of the atmosphere is a product of UV
radiation acting on oxygen (O,) molecule. The higher energy UV
radiations split apart some moleculer oxygen (O,) into free oxygen (O)
atoms. These atoms then combine with the molecular oxygen to form
ozone as shown—

o, —“>0+0

0+0, 303
(Ozone)

The amount of ozone in the atmosphere began to drop sharply in
the 1980s. This decrease has been linked to synthetic chemicals like
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which are used as refrigerants and in fire
extinguishers. In 1987, the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) succeeded in forging an agreement to freeze CFC production at
1986 levels.

Activity 15.6

Find out from the library. internet or newspaper reports, which
chemicals are responsible for the depletion of the ozone layer.
Find out if the regulations put in place to control the emission of
these chemicals have succeeded in reducing the damage to the
ozone layer. Has the size of the hole in the ozone layer changed in
recent years?

15.3.2 Managing the Garbage we Produce

Visit any town or city, and we are sure to find heaps of garbage all over
the place. Visit any place of tourist interest and we are sure to find the
place littered with empty food wrappers. In the earlier classes we have
talked about this problem of dealing with the garbage that we generate.
Let us now look at the problem a bit more deeply.

Activity 15.7

Find out what happens to the waste generated at home. Is there a
system in place to collect this waste?

Find out how the local body (panchayat, municipal corporation,
resident welfare association) deals with the waste. Are there
mechanisms in place to treat the biodegradable and non-
biodegradable wastes separately?

Science

Page_Number 262 ended
/n
Page_Number 263 started
Activity 15.8

Calculate how much waste is generated at home in a day.

How much of this waste is biodegradable?

Calculate how much waste is generated in the classroom
ina day.

How much of this waste is biodegradable?

Suggest ways of dealing with this waste.

Activity 15.9

= Find out how the sewage in your locality is treated. Are there
mechanisms in place to ensure that local water bodies are not

polluted by untreated sewage.
= Find out how the local industries in your locality treat their wastes.
Are there mechanisms in place to ensure that the soil and water

are not polluted by this waste?

Improvements in our life-style have resulted in greater amounts of
waste material generation. Changes in attitude also have a role to play.
with more and more things we use becoming disposable. Changes in
packaging have resulted in much of our waste becoming non-
biodegradable. What do you think will be the impact of these on our
environment?

Think it over

Disposable cups in trains
If you ask your parents, they will probably remember a time when tea in trains was
served in plastic glasses which had to be returned to the vendor. The introduction of
disposable cups was hailed as a step forward for reasons of hygiene. No one at that time
perhaps thought about the impact caused by the disposal of millions of these cups ona
daily basis. Some time back, kulhads, that is, disposable cups made of clay. were
suggested as an alternative. But a little thought showed that making these kulhads on
a large scale would result in the loss of the fertile top-soil. Now disposable paper-cups
are being used. What do you think are the advantages of disposable paper-cups over

disposable plastic cups?

Activity 15.10

= Search the internet or library to find out what hazardous materials
have to be dealt with while disposing of electronic items. How would
these materials affect the environment?

= Find out how plastics are recycled. Does the recycling process
have any impact on the environment?

Our Environment 26

Page_Number 263 ended
/n
Page_Number 264 started
QU ES TION §S

What is ozone and how does it affect any ecosystem?

How can you help in reducing the problem of waste disposal? Give any
two methods.

The various components of an ecosystem are interdependent.

The producers make the energy from sunlight available to the rest of the ecosystem.
There is a loss of energy as we go from one trophic level to the next, this limits the
number of trophic levels in a food-chain.

Human activities have an impact on the environment.

The use of chemicals like CFCs has endangered the ozone layer. Since the ozone
layer protects against the ultraviolet radiation from the Sun, this could damage
the environment.

The waste we generate may be biodegradable or non-biodegradable.

The disposal of the waste we generate is causing serious environmental problems.

1. Which of the following groups contain only biodegradable items?
(a) Grass, flowers and leather
(b) Grass, wood and plastic
(c)  Fruit-peels, cake and lime-juice
(d) Cake, wood and grass
2. Which of the following constitute a_food-chain?
(a) Grass, wheat and mango
(b) Grass, goat and human
(c) Goat, cow and elephant
(a) Grass, fish and goat
3. Which of the following are environment-friendly practices?
(a) Carrying cloth-bags to put purchases in while shopping
(b) Switching off unnecessary lights and fans
(c) Walking to school instead of getting your mother to drop you on her scooter
(ad) Allof the above

26 Science

Page_Number 264 ended
/n
Page_Number 265 started
What will happen if we kill all the organisms in one trophic level?

Will the impact of removing all the organisms in a trophic level be different for
different trophic levels? Can the organisms of any trophic level be removed without
causing any damage to the ecosystem?

What is biological magnification? Will the levels of this magnification be different at
different levels of the ecosystem?

What are the problems caused by the non-biodegradable wastes that we generate?

If all the waste we generate is biodegradable, will this have no impact on the
environment?

Why is damage to the ozone layer a cause for concern? What steps are being taken
to limit this damage?

Our Environment 26

Page_Number 265 ended
/n
Page_Number 266 started
CHAPTER 1 6

- Management of
P= Natural Resources

WwW learnt in Class LX, about some natural resources like soil, air
and water and how various components are cycled over and over
again in nature, In the previous chapter we also learnt about the pollution
of these resources because of some of our activities. In this chapter, we
shall look at some of our resources and how we are using them. May be
we should also think about how we ought to be using our resources so
as to sustain the resources and conserve our environment. We shall be
looking at our natural resources like forests, wild-life, water, coal and
petroleum and see what are the issues at stake in deciding how these
resources are to be managed for sustainable development.

We often hear or read about environmental problems. These are often
global-level problems and we feel helpless to make any changes. There
are international laws and regulations, and then there are our own
national laws and acts for environmental protection. There are also
national and international organisations working towards protecting our
environment.

Activity 16.1

Find out about the international norms to regulate the emission
of carbon dioxide.

Have a discussion in class about how we can contribute towards
meeting those norms.

Activity 16.2

There are a number of organisations that seek to spread awareness
about our environment and promote activities and attitudes that
lead to the conservation of our environment and natural resources.
Find out about the organisation(s) active in your neighbourhood/
village/town / city.

Find out how you can contribute towards the same cause.

Awareness about the problems caused by unthinkingly exploiting
our resources has been a fairly recent phenomenon in our society. And
once this awareness rises, some action is usually taken. You must have
heard about the Ganga Action Plan. This multi-crore project came about
in 1985 because the quality of the water in the Ganga was very poor

Page_Number 266 ended
/n
Page_Number 267 started
(see Fig. 16.1). Coliform is a group of bacteria, found in human intestines,
whose presence in water indicates contamination by disease-causing

microorganisms.
1400:
1200
a
— 1000
°
is)
=
S
Z 800
&
£
g 600:
9
3
g 400
&
200:
0.
PC ESEEEEEEEEETLIECECEFE
g e842 es asd8 255 56 225g8as8
eUe oe £2 224755 BIN SR ag
a3 a
£38 Be FU 2255 g £8
5 U a 30 io} 5 5
¢ ms
bd a
Maximum/ Minimum
Minimum Annual mean Desired level
MPN: most probable number mL: millilitre
u/s: upstream d/s: downstream

Figure 16.1 Total coliform count levels in the Ganga (1993-1994)

Source: Anon 1996, Water Quality — Status and Statistics (1993 & 1994),
Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi, p.11.

D ) © ® ® D ®

Pollution of the Ganga
The Ganga runs its course of over 2500 km from Gangotri in the Himalayas to Ganga
Sagar in the Bay of Bengal. It is being turned into a drain by more than a hundred
towns and cities in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal that pour their garbage

and excreta into it. Largely untreated sewage is dumped into the Ganges every
day. In addition, think of the pollution caused by other human activities like
bathing, washing of clothes and immersion of ashes or unburnt corpses. And then,
industries contribute chemical effluents to the Ganga’s pollution load and the
toxicity kills fish in large sections of the river.

As you can see, there are some measurable factors which are used
to quantify pollution or the quality of the water that we use for various
activities. Some of the pollutants are harmful even when present in very
small quantities and we require sophisticated equipment to measure
them. But as we learnt in Chapter 2, the pH of water is something that
can easily be checked using universal indicator.

Management of Natural Resources 26

Page_Number 267 ended
/n
Page_Number 268 started
26

Activity 16.3

Check the pH of the water supplied to your house using universal
indicator or litmus paper.

Also check the pH of the water in the local water body (pond, river,
lake, stream).

Can you say whether the water is polluted or not on the basis of
your observations?

But we need not feel powerless or overwhelmed by the scale of the
problems because there are many things we can do to make a difference.
You must have come across the three R’s to save the environment: Reduce,
Recycle and Reuse. What do they refer to?

Reduce: This means that you use less. You save electricity by switching
off unnecessary lights and fans. You save water by repairing
leaky taps. You do not waste food. Can you think of other
things that you can reduce the usage of ?

Recycle: This means that you collect plastic, paper, glass and metal
items and recycle these materials to make required things
instead of synthesising or extracting fresh plastic, paper glass
or metal. In order to recycle, we first need to segregate our
wastes so that the material that can be recycled is not dumped
along with other wastes. Does your village/town/city have a
mechanism in place for recycling these materials?

Reuse: This is actually even better than recycling because the process
of recycling uses some energy. In the ‘reuse’ strategy, you
simply use things again and again. Instead of throwing away
used envelopes, you can reverse it and use it again. The plastic
bottles in which you buy various food-items like jam or pickle
can be used for storing things in the kitchen. What other items
can we reuse?

But even while making everyday choices, we can make environment
Jriendly decisions. For doing this, we need to know more about how our
choices affect the environment, these effects may be immediate or long-
term or long-ranging. The concept of sustainable development
encourages forms of growth that meet current basic human needs, while
preserving the resources for the needs of future generations. Economic
development is linked to environmental conservation. Thus sustainable
development implies a change in all aspects of life. It depends upon the
willingness of the people to change their perceptions of the socio-economic
and environmental conditions around them, and the readiness of each
individual to alter their present use of natural resources.

Activity 16.4

Have you ever visited a town or village after a few years of absence?
If so, have you noticed new roads and houses that have come up
since you were there last? Where do you think the materials for
making these roads and buildings have come from?

Try and make a list of the materials and their probable sources.
Discuss the list you have prepared with your classmates. Can
you think of ways in which the use of these materials be reduced?

Science

Page_Number 268 ended
/n
Page_Number 269 started
16.1 WHY DO WE NEED TO MANAGE OUR RESOURCES?

Not just roads and buildings, but all the things we use or consume-
food, clothes, books, toys, furniture, tools and vehicles — are obtained
Jrom resources on this earth. The only thing we get from outside is energy
which we receive from the Sun. Even this energy is processed by living
organisms and various physical and chemical processes on the earth
before we make use of it.

Why do we need to use our resources carefully? Because these are
not unlimited and with the human population increasing at a
tremendous rate due to improvement in health-care, the demand for all
resources is increasing at an exponential rate. The management of
natural resources requires a long-term perspective so that these will
last for the generations to come and will not merely be exploited to the
hilt for short term gains. This management should also ensure equitable
distribution of resources so that all, and not just a handful of rich and
powerful people, benefit from the development of these resources.

Another factor to be considered while we exploit these natural
resources is the damage we cause to the environment while these
resources are either extracted or used. For example, mining causes
pollution because of the large amount of slag which is discarded for
every tonne of metal extracted. Hence, sustainable natural resource
management demands that we plan for the safe disposal of these
wastes too.

Q U ES TION §

What changes can you make in your habits to become more environment-
Jriendly?

What would be the advantages of exploiting resources with short-term
aims?

How would these advantages differ from the advantages of using a long-
term perspective in managing our resources?

Why do you think there should be equitable distribution of resources?
What forces would be working against an equitable distribution of our
resources?

16.2 FORESTS AND WILD LIFE

Forests are ‘biodiversity hot spots’. One measure of the biodiversity of
an area is the number of species found there. However, the range of
different life forms (bacteria, fungi, ferns, flowering plants, nematodes,
insects, birds, reptiles and so on) is also important. One of the main
aims of conservation is to try and preserve the biodiversity we have
inherited. Experiments and field studies suggest that a loss of diversity
may lead to a loss of ecological stability.

Management of Natural Resources 26

Page_Number 269 ended
/n
Page_Number 270 started
A view ofa forest life

16.2.1 Stakeholders
Activity 16.5

Make a list of forest produce that you use.

What do you think a person living near a forest would use?
What do you think a person living in a forest would use?
Discuss with your classmates how these needs differ or do not
differ and the reasons for the same.

We all use various forest produce. But our dependency on forest
resources varies. Some of us have access to alternatives, some do not.
When we consider the conservation of forests, we need to look at the
stakeholders who are -

fi) the people who live in or around forests are dependent on forest

produce for various aspects of their life (see Fig. 16.2).

fii) the Forest Department of the Government which owns the land
and controls the resources from forests.

fii) the industrialists — from those who use ‘tendu’ leaves to make
bidis to the ones with paper mills — who use various forest produce,
but are not dependent on the forests in any one area.

(iv) the wild life and nature enthusiasts who want to conserve nature
in its pristine form.

Let us take a look at what each of these groups
needs/gets out of the forests. The local people
need large quantities of firewood, small timber
and thatch. Bamboo is used to make slats for huts,
and baskets for collecting and storing food
materials. Implements for agriculture, fishing and
hunting are largely made of wood, also forests
are sites for fishing and hunting. In addition to
people gathering fruits, nuts and medicines from
the forests, their cattle also graze in forest areas
or feed on other fodder which is collected from
Jorests.

Do you think such use of forest resources would lead to the
exhaustion of these resources? Do not forget that before the British came
and took over most of our forest areas, people had been living in these
Jorests for centuries. They had developed practices to ensure that the
resources were used in a sustainable manner. After the British took
control of the forests (which they exploited ruthlessly for their own
purposes), these people were forced to depend on much smaller areas
and forest resources started becoming over-exploited to some extent.
The Forest Department in independent India took over from the British
but local knowledge and local needs continued to be ignored in the
management practices. Thus vast tracts of forests have been converted
to monocultures of pine, teak or eucalyptus. In order to plant these
trees, huge areas are first cleared of all vegetation. This destroys a large
amount of biodiversity in the area. Not only this, the varied needs of the

Science

Page_Number 270 ended
/n
Page_Number 271 started
local people — leaves for fodder, herbs for medicines, fruits and nuts for
food — can no longer be met from such forests. Such plantations are
useful for the industries to access specific products and are an important
source of revenue for the Forest Department.

Do you know how many industries are based on forest produce? A
short count reveals timber, paper, lac and sports equipment.

Activity 16.6

Find out about any two forest produce that are the basis for an
industry.

Discuss whether this industry is sustainable in the long run. Or
do we need to control our consumption of these products?

Industries would consider the forest as merely a source of raw
material for its factories. And huge interest-groups lobby the government
Jor access to these raw materials at artificially low rates. Since these
industries have a greater reach than the local people, they are not
interested in the sustainability of the forest in one particular area. For
example, after cutting down all the teak trees in one area, they will get
their teak from a forest farther away. They do not have any stake in
ensuring that one particular area should yield on optimal amount of
some produce for all generations to come. What do you think will stop
the local people in behaving in a similar manner?

Lastly, we come to the nature and wildlife enthusiasts who are in no
way dependent on the forests, but who may have considerable say in
their management. The conservationists were initially taken up with large
animals like lions, tigers, elephants and rhinoceros. They now recognise
the need to preserve biodiversity as a whole. But shouldn't we recognise
people as forming part of the forest system? There have been enough
instances of local people working traditionally for conservation of forests.
For example, the case of the Bishnoi community in Rajasthan, for whom
conservation of forest and wildlife has been a religious tenet. The
Government of India has recently instituted an ‘Amrita Devi Bishnoi
National Award for Wildlife Conservation’ in the memory of Amrita Devi
Bishnoi, who in 1731 sacrificed her life along with 363 others for the
protection of Ichejri’ trees in Khejrali village near Jodhpur in Rajasthan.

Studies have shown that the prejudice against the traditional use of
Jjorest areas has no basis. Here is an example — the great Himalayan
National Park contains, within its reserved area, alpine meadows which
were grazed by sheep in summer. Nomadic shepherds drove their flock
up from the valleys every summer. When this national park was formed,
this practice was put to an end. Now it is seen that without the regular
grazing by sheep the grass first grows very tall. and then falls over
preventing fresh growth.

Management of protected areas, by keeping the local people out, by
using force cannot possibly be successful in the long run. In any case, the
damage caused to forests cannot be attributed to only the local people —
one cannot turn a blind eye to the deforestation caused by industrial

Management of Natural Resources

Page_Number 271 ended
/n
Page_Number 272 started
needs or development projects like building roads or dams. The damage
caused in these reserves by tourists or the arrangements made for their
convenience is also to be considered.

We need to accept that human intervention has been very much a
part of the forest landscape. What has to be managed in the nature and
extent of this intervention. Forest resources ought to be used in a manner
that is both environmentally and developmentally sound — in other words,
while the environment is preserved, the benefits of the controlled
exploitation go to the local people, a process in which decentralised
economic growth and ecological conservation go hand in hand. The kind
of economic and social development we want will ultimately determine
whether the environment will be conserved or further destroyed. The
environment must not be regarded as a pristine collection of plants and
animals. It is a vast and complex entity that offers a range of natural
resources for our use. We need to use these resources with due caution
Jor our economic and social growth, and to meet our material aspirations.

16.2.2 Sustainable Management

We need to consider if the goals of all the above stakeholders with regard
to the management of the forests are the same. Forest resources are
often made available for industrial use at rates far below the market
value while these are denied to the local people. The Chipko Andolan
(Hug the Trees Movement’) was the result of a grassroot level effort to
end the alienation of people from their forests. The movement originated
Jjrom an incident in a remote village called Reni in Garhwal, high-up in
the Himalayas during the early 1970s. There was a dispute between the
local villagers and a logging contractor who had been allowed to fell
trees in a forest close to the village. On a particular day, the contractor’s
workers appeared in the forest to cut the trees while the men folk were
absent. Undeterred, the women of the village reached the forest quickly
and clasped the tree trunks thus preventing the workers from felling the
trees. Thus thwarted, the contractor had to withdraw.

Inherent in such a competition to control a natural resource is the
conservation of a replenishable resource. Specifically the method of use
was being called into question. The contractor would have felled the
trees, destroying them forever. The communities traditionally lop the
branches and pluck the leaves, allowing the resource to replenish over
time. The Chipko movement quickly spread across communities and
media, and forced the government, to whom the forest belongs, to rethink
their priorities in the use of forest produce. Experience has taught people
that the destruction of forests affected not just the availability of forest
products, but also the quality of soil and the sources of water.
Participation of the local people can indeed lead to the efficient
management of forests.

An Example of People’s Participation in the Management of Forests
In 1972, the West Bengal Forest Department recognised its failures in
reviving the degraded Sal forests in the southwestern districts of the
state. Traditional methods of surveillance and policing had led to a

Science

Page_Number 272 ended
/n
Page_Number 273 started
‘complete alienation of the people from the administration’, resulting in

Jrequent clashes between forest officials and villagers. Forest and land
related conflicts in the region were also a major factor in fuelling the
militant peasant movements led by the Naxalites.

Accordingly, the Department changed its strategy. making a
beginning in the Arabari forest range of Midnapore district. Here, at the
instance of a far-seeing forest officer, A.K. Banerjee, villagers were involved
in the protection of 1.272 hectares of badly degraded sal forest. In return

Jor help in protection, villagers were given employment in both silviculture

and harvesting operations, 25 per cent of the final harvest, and allowed
fuelwood and fodder collection on payment of a nominal fee. With the
active and willing participation of the local community, the sal forests of
Arabari underwent a remarkable recovery — by 1983, a previously
worthless forest was valued Rs 12.5 crores.

Activity 16.7

Debate the damage caused to forests by the following —

(a) Building rest houses for tourists in national parks.

(b) Grazing domestic animals in national parks.

(c) Tourists throwing plastic bottles/covers and other litter in
national parks.

Q U ES TION $

Why should we conserve forests and wildlife?

Suggest some approaches towards the conservation of forests.

16.3 WATER FOR ALL
Activity 16.8

Villages suffering from chronic water shortage surround a water
theme park in Maharashtra. Debate whether this is the optimum
use of the available water.

Water is a basic necessity for all terrestrial forms of life. We studied in
Class IX about the importance of water as a resource, the water cycle
and how human intervention pollutes water bodies. However, human
intervention also changes the availability of water in various regions.

Activity 16.9

Study the rainfall patterns in India from an atlas.
Identify the regions where water is abundant and the regions of
water scarcity.

Management of Natural Resources 2

Page_Number 273 ended
/n
Page_Number 274 started
After the above activity, would you be very surprised to learn that
regions of water scarcity are closely correlated to the regions of acute
poverty?

A study of rainfall patterns does not reveal the whole truth behind
the water availability in various regions in India. Rains in India are largely
due to the monsoons. This means that most of the rain falls in a few
months of the year. Despite nature’s monsoon bounty, failure to sustain
water availability underground has resulted largely from the loss of
vegetation cover, diversion for high water demanding crops, and pollution
Jrom industrial effluents and urban wastes. Irrigation methods like dams,
tanks and canals have been used in various parts of India since ancient
times. These were generally local interventions managed by local people
and assured that the basic minimum requirements for both agriculture
and daily needs were met throughout the year. The use of this stored
water was strictly regulated and the optimum cropping patterns based
on the water availability were arrived at on the basis of decades/centuries
of experience, the maintenance of these irrigation systems was also a
local affair,

The arrival of the British changed these systems as it changed many
other things. The conception of large scale projects — large dams and
canals traversing large distances were first conceived and implemented
by the British and carried on with no less gusto by our newly formed
independent government. These mega-projects led to the neglect of the
local irrigation methods, and the government also increasingly took over
the administration of these systems leading to the loss of control over
the local water sources by the local people.

Kulhs in Himachal Pradesh
Parts of Himachal Pradesh had evolved a local system of canal irrigation called kulhs
over four hundred years ago. The water flowing in the streams was diverted into
man-made channels which took this water to numerous villages down the hillside.
The management of the water flowing in these kulhs was by common agreement among

all the villages. Interestingly, during the planting season, water was first used by the
village farthest away from the source of the kulh, then by villages progressively higher
up. These kulhs were managed by two or three people who were paid by the villagers.
In addition to irrigation, water from these kulhs also percolated into the soil and fed
springs at various points. After the kulhs were taken over by the Irrigation Department,
most of them became defunct and there is no amicable sharing of water as before.

16.3.1 Dams

Why do we seek to build dams? Large dams can ensure the storage of
adequate water not just for irrigation, but also for generating electricity.
as discussed in the previous chapter. Canal systems leading from these
dams can transfer large amounts of water great distances. For example,
the Indira Gandhi Canal has brought greenery to considerable areas of
Rajasthan. However, mismanagement of the water has largely led to the
benefits being cornered by afew people. There is no equitable distribution

Science

Page_Number 274 ended
/n
Page_Number 275 started
of water, thus people close to the source grow water intensive crops like
sugarcane and rice while people farther downstream do not get any water.
The woes of these people who have been promised benefits which never
arrived are added to the discontentment among the people who have
been displaced by the building of the dam and its canal network.

In the previous chapter, we mentioned the reasons for opposition to
the construction of large dams, such as the Tehri Dam on the river Ganga.
You must have read about the protests by the Narmada Bachao Andolan
(Save the Narmada Movement’) about raising the height of the Sardar
Sarovar Dam on the river Narmada. Criticisms about large dams address
three problems in particular —

(@) Social problems because they displace large number of peasants

and tribals without adequate compensation or rehabilitation,

(i) Economic problems because they swallow up huge amounts of

public money without the generation of proportionate benefits,
Gi) Environmental problems because they contribute enormously
to deforestation and the loss of biological diversity.

The people who have been displaced by various development projects
are largely poor tribals who do not get any benefits from these projects
and are alienated from their lands and forests without adequate
compensation. The oustees of the Tawa Dam built in the 1970s are still
Jighting for the benefits they were promised.

16.3.2 Water Harvesting

Watershed management emphasises scientific soil and water
conservation in order to increase the biomass production. The aim is to
develop primary resources of land and water, to produce secondary
resources of plants and animals for use ina manner which will not cause
ecological imbalance. Watershed management not only increases the
production and income of the watershed community, but also mitigates
droughts and floods and increases the life of the downstream dam and
reservoirs. Various organisations have been working on rejuvenating
ancient systems of water harvesting as an alternative to the ‘mmega-projects’
like dams. These communities have used hundreds of indigenous water
saving methods to capture every trickle of water that had fallen on their
land; dug small pits and lakes, put in place simple watershed systems,
built small earthen dams, constructed dykes, sand and limestone
reservoirs, set up rooftop water-collecting units. This has recharged
groundwater levels and even brought rivers back to life.

Water harvesting is an age-old concept in India. Khadins, tanks
and nadis in Rajasthan, bandharas and tals in Maharashtra, bundhis
in Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, ahars and pynes in Bihar,
kulhs in Himachal Pradesh. ponds in the Kandi belt of Jammu region,
and eris (tanks) in Tamil Nadu, surangams in Kerala, and kaitas in
Karnataka are some of the ancient water harvesting, including water
conveyance, structures still in use today (see Fig. 16.3 for an
example). Water harvesting techniques are highly locale specific and
the benefits are also localised. Giving people control over their local
water resources ensures that mismanagement and over-exploitation
of these resources is reduced/ removed.

Management of Natural Resources

Page_Number 275 ended
/n
Page_Number 276 started
<— Catchment

ARS Shallow

Khadin or cropped area dugwell

Seepage

Figure 16.3 Traditional water harvesting system — an tdeal setting of the khadin system

In largely level terrain, the water harvesting structures are mainly
crescent shaped earthen embankments or low, straight concrete-and-
rubble “check dams” built across seasonally flooded gullies. Monsoon
rains fill ponds behind the structures. Only the largest structures hold
water year round; most dry up six months or less after the monsoons.
Their main purpose, however, is not to hold surface water but to recharge
the ground water beneath. The advantages of water stored in the ground
are many. It does not evaporate, but spreads out to recharge wells and
provides moisture for vegetation over a wide area. In addition, it does
not provide breeding grounds for mosquitoes like stagnant water collected
in ponds or artificial lakes. The ground-waiter is also relatively protected
Jjrom contamination by human and animal waste.

QUESTIONS

Find out about the traditional systems of water harvesting/management
in your region.

Compare the above system with the probable systems in hilly/
mountainous areas or plains or plateau regions.

Find out the source of water in your region/locality. Is water from this
source available to all people living in that area?

16.4 COAL AND PETROLEUM

We have seen some of the issues involved in the conservation and
sustainable use of resources like forests, wild-life and water. These can
meet our needs perpetually if we were to use them in a sustainable
manner. Now we come to yet another important resource — fossil fuels,
that is, coal and petroleum, which are important sources of energy for
us. Since the industrial revolution, we have been using increasing
amounts of energy to meet our basic needs and _for the manufacture of a

26 Science

Page_Number 276 ended
/n
Page_Number 277 started
large number of goods upon which our lives depend. These energy needs
have been largely met by the reserves of coal and petroleum.

The management of these energy sources involves slightly different
perspectives from those resources discussed earlier. Coal and petroleum
were formed from the degradation of bio-mass millions of years ago and
hence these are resources that will be exhausted in the future no matter
how carefully we use them. And then we would need to look for alternative
sources of energy. Various estimates as to how long these resources will
last us exist and one is that at present rates of usage, our known
petroleum resources will last us for about forty years and the coal
resources will last for another two hundred years.

But looking to other sources of energy is not the only consideration
when we look at the consumption of coal and petroleum. Since coal and
petroleum have been formed from bio-mass, in addition to carbon, these
contain hydrogen, nitrogen and sulphur. When these are burnt, the
products are carbon dioxide, water, oxides of nitrogen and oxides of
sulphur. When combustion takes place in insufficient air (oxygen). then
carbon monoxide is formed instead of carbon dioxide. Of these products,
the oxides of sulphur and nitrogen and carbon monoxide are poisonous
at high concentrations and carbon dioxide is a green-house gas. Another
way of looking at coal and petroleum is that they are huge reservoirs of
carbon and if all of this carbon is converted to carbon dioxide, then the
amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is going to increase leading
to intense global warming. Thus, we need to use these resources
judiciously.

Activity 16.10

Coal is used in thermal power stations and petroleum products
like petrol and diesel are used in means of transport like motor
vehicles, ships and aeroplanes. We cannot really imagine life
without a number of electrical appliances and constant use of
transportation. So can you think of ways in which our consumption
of coal and petroleum products be reduced?

Some simple choices can make a difference in our energy consumption
patterns. Think over the relative advantages, disadvantages and
environment-friendliness of the following —

(@ Taking a bus, using your personal vehicle or walking/cycling.

(ii) Using bulbs or fluorescent tubes in your homes.

(iii) Using the lift or taking the stairs.
(iv) Wearing an extra sweater or using a heating device (heater or
‘sigri’) on cold days.

The management of coal and petroleum also addresses the efficiency
of our machines. Fuel is most commonly used in internal combustion
engines for transportation and recent research in this field concentrates
on ensuring complete combustion in these engines in order to increase
efficiency and also reduce air pollution.

Management of Natural Resources

Page_Number 277 ended
/n
Page_Number 278 started
Activity 16.11

You must have heard of the Euro I and Euro II norms for emission
Jrom vehicles. Find out how these norms work towards reducing
air pollution.

16.5 AN OVERVIEW OF NATURAL RESOURCE
MANAGEMENT

Sustainable management of natural resources is a difficult task. In
addressing this issue, we need to keep an open mind with regard to the
interests of various stakeholders. We need to accept that people will act
with their own best interests as the priority. But the realisation that
such selfish goals will lead to misery for a large number of people anda
total destruction of our environment is slowly growing. Going beyond
laws, rules and regulations, we need to tailor our requirements,
individually and collectively, so that the benefits of development reach
everyone now and for all generations to come.

Our resources like forests, wild life, water, coal and petroleum need to be used ina
sustainable manner.

We can reduce pressure on the environment by sincerely applying the maxim of
‘Reduce, Reuse and Recycle’ in our lives.

Management of forest resources has to take into account the interests of various
stakeholders.

The harnessing of water resources by building dams has social, economic and

environmental implications. Alternatives to large dams exist. These are locale-specific
and may be developed so as to give local people control over their local resources.
The fossil fuels, coal and petroleum, will ultimately be exhausted. Because of this
and because their combustion pollutes our environment, we need to use these
resources judiciously.

1. What changes would you suggest in your home in order to be environment-friendly?

2. Can you suggest some changes in your school which would make it environment-
friendly?

3. We saw in this chapter that there are four main stakeholders when it comes to

forests and wildlife. Which among these should have the authority to decide the
management of forest produce? Why do you think so?

2 Science

Page_Number 278 ended
/n
Page_Number 279 started
How can you as an individual contribute or make a difference to the management
of (a) forests and wildlife, (b) water resources and (c) coal and petroleum?

What can you as an individual do to reduce your consumption of the various
natural resources?

List five things you have done over the last one week to —
(a) conserve our natural resources.

(b) increase the pressure on our natural resources.

On the basis of the issues raised in this chapter, what changes would you incorporate
in your life-style in a move towards a sustainable use of our resources?

Management of Natural Resources 2

Page_Number 279 ended
/n
Page_Number 280 started
Chapter 1
1. fi

Chapter 2
1. (d)

Chapter 3
1. (d)

Chapter 4
1. (b)

Chapter 5
1. (od

Chapter 6
1. (od

Chapter 7
1. (ad) L » @

Chapter 8
1. (b) - (c) - @

Chapter 9
1. () . (a) - (a)

Chapter 10
1. (d) 2. (a) 3. (c)
5

(a) (ad) 6. (co)

. Distance less than 15 cm; virtual; Enlarged.
Yes
16.7 cm from the lens on the other side; 3.3 cm, reduced; real, inverted.
30 cm
6.0 cm, behind the mirror; virtual, erect

m= 1 indicates that image formed by a plane mirror is of the same size as the object.
Further, the positive sign of m indicates that the image is virtual and erect.

8.6 cm, behind the mirror; virtual, erect; 2.2 cm, reduced.
54 cmon the object side; 14 cm, magnified; real, inverted.
—0.50 m; concave lens

+ 0.67 m; converging lens

2 Science

Page_Number 280 ended
/n
Page_Number 281 started
Chapter 11
1. (b) 2. (d) 3. (c)
5. (i) -0.18 m; (ii) +0.67 m
6. Concave lens; -1.25 D
7. Convex lens; +3.0 D

Chapter 12
1. @ 2. (b) 3. (d)
5. Parallel 6. 122.7 m; % times
7. 3.33 Q 8. 4.8 kQ 9. 0.67 A

10. 4 resistors 12. 110 bulbs
13. 92A,4.6A, 18.3A

14. (@) 12 W; (i) SW
15. 0.73 A
16. 250 WTYV set in 1 hour
17. 120W
18. (b) High resistivity of alloys
(@) inversely.

Chapter 13

1. (d) 2. (c) 3. (a)

6. (a) False (b) True

10. vertically downwards

(c) True

4. (c)

4, (ad) 5. (c)
(da) False

13. (i) The needle will move momentarily in one direction
(ii) The needle will move momentarily but in opposite direction to (i)
(iii) No deflection in the needle would be observed.

15. (a) Right-hand thumb rule, (b) Fleming’s left-hand rule, (c) Fleming’s right-

hand rule.
Chapter 14
1. (b) 2. (c) 3. (cd)
Chapter 15
1. (a) {c), @) 2. (b) 3.
Answers

Page_Number 281 ended
